It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteeninston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape thile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansionshough not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from enterinlong with him.
The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it oloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wallt depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of an of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsomeatures. Winston made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Evet the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electriurrent was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drivn preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and Winstonho was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, wenlowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite thift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It wane of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you abouhen you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.
Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which haomething to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from ablong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surfacf the right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sanomewhat, though the words were still distinguishable. The instrumenthe telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way ohutting it off completely. He moved over to the window: a smallish, fraiigure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overallhich were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his facaturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razolades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.
Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down ihe street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper intpirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, thereemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastereverywhere. The black-moustachio'd face gazed down from every commandinorner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHES WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep intinston's own. Down at street level another poster, torn at one cornerlapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering thingle word INGSOC. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down betweehe roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away agaiith a curving flight. It was the police patrol, snooping into people'indows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Policattered.
Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling awabout pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. Thelescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winstoade, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by itoreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metalaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of courso way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. Hoften, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individuaire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody alhe time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanteo. You had to live--did live, from habit that became instinct--in thssumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except iarkness, every movement scrutinized.
Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer; though, as hell knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry oruth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscapehis, he thought with a sort of vague distaste--this was London, chieity of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces oceania. He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell hihether London had always been quite like this. Were there always thesistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up witaulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofith corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directionsnd the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and thillow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where thombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonief wooden dwellings like chicken-houses? But it was no use, he could noemember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-liableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible.
The Ministry of Truth--Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the officiaanguage of Oceania. For an account of its structure and etymology seppendix.]--was startlingly different from any other object in sight. Ias an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soarinp, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where Winstotood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face ilegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party:
  WAR IS PEAC FREEDOM IS SLAVER IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH
The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms abovround level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about Londohere were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. Sompletely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously. Theere the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatuf government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itselith news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry oeace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, whicaintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsiblor economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluvnd Miniplenty.
The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windown it at all. Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, noithin half a kilometre of it. It was a place impossible to enter excepn official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze oarbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Evehe streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faceuards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.
Winston turned round abruptly. He had set his features into thxpression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facinhe telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leavinhe Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in thanteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen excep hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow'reakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquiith a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oilmell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured out nearly a teacupfulerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine.
Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. Thtuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had thensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. Thext moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the worlegan to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packearked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon thobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successfule went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stooo the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out enholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with ed back and a marbled cover.
For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusuaosition. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, whert could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite thindow. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winstoas now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably beentended to hold bookshelves. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping welack, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, sar as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayen his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusuaeography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was nobout to do.
But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out ohe drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful book. Its smooth creamy paper little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured fot least forty years past. He could guess, however, that the book was muclder than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy littlunk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did noow remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desiro possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shop'dealing on the free market', it was called), but the rule was notrictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces anazor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. Had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped insidnd bought the book for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not consciouf wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily homn his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromisinossession.
The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illeganothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detectet was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at leasy twenty-five years in a forced-labour camp. Winston fitted a nib inthe penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archainstrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured oneurtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that theautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib insteaf being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to writiny hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dictate everythinnto the speak-write which was of course impossible for his presenurpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just econd. A tremor had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was thecisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote:
   April 4th, 1984.
He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him. Tegin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. Iust be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age wahirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two.
For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diaryor the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round thoubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against thewspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he handertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? Ias of its nature impossible. Either the future would resemble the presentn which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from itnd his predicament would be meaningless.
For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen hahanged over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemeot merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to havorgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weekast he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crosseis mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writinould be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminablestless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally foears. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreoveis varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch itecause if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were tickiny. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in fronf him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the musicnd a slight booziness caused by the gin.
Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of whae was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up anown the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even itull stops:
   April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very goone of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterraneanudience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim awaith a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in thater like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsightshen he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank auddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting witaughter when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with elicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have bee jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old ier arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between hereasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman puttiner arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with frigherself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thougher arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 2ilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwoodhen there was a wonderful shot of a child's arm going up up up right unto the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed ip and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down ihe prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shoutinhey didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it ainight not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned heut i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proleay typical prole reaction they never----
Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp. He diot know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curiouhing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory halarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal triting it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incidenhat he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today.
It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous coule said to happen.
It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where Winstoorked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping then the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation fohe Two Minutes Hate. Winston was just taking his place in one of thiddle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spokeo, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he ofteassed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that shorked in the Fiction Department. Presumably--since he had sometimes seeer with oily hands and carrying a spanner--she had some mechanical jon one of the novel-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, obout twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletiovements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, waound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough tring out the shapeliness of her hips. Winston had disliked her from thery first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of thtmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and generalean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He dislikeearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was alwayhe women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigotedherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies anosers-out of unorthodoxy. But this particular girl gave him the impressiof being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridohe gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right intim and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had everossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. Thatt was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a peculianeasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenevehe was anywhere near him.
The other person was a man named O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party anolder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a didea of its nature. A momentary hush passed over the group of peoplound the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party membepproaching. O'Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarseumorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had ertain charm of manner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles ois nose which was curiously disarming--in some indefinable way, curiouslivilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in sucerms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering hinuffbox. Winston had seen O'Brien perhaps a dozen times in almost as manears. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intriguey the contrast between O'Brien's urbane manner and his prize-fighter'hysique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief--or perhapot even a belief, merely a hope--that O'Brien's political orthodoxy waot perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. And againerhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, buimply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being erson that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen anet him alone. Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify thiuess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment O'Brien glancet his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidentlecided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate waver. He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston waetween them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind.
The next moment a hideous, grinding screech, as of some monstrous machinunning without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the roomt was a noise that set one's teeth on edge and bristled the hair at thack of one's neck. The Hate had started.
As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, halashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among thudience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear anisgust. Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long aghow long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leadinigures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, anhen had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemneo death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmef the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none ihich Goldstein was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitorhe earliest defiler of the Party's purity. All subsequent crimes againshe Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviationsprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was stillive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the seander the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even--so it waccasionally rumoured--in some hiding-place in Oceania itself.
Winston's diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face ooldstein without a painful mixture of emotions. It was a lean Jewish faceith a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard--lever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senililliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacleas perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had heep-like quality. Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attacpon the doctrines of the Party--an attack so exaggerated and perverse tha child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausiblnough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, lesevel-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing Birother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demandinhe immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedof speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thoughte was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed--and alhis in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of thabitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeaords: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normallse in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as the reality which Goldstein's specious claptrap covered, behind his head ohe telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army--rofter row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swap to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by otherxactly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers' boots formed thackground to Goldstein's bleating voice.
Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollablxclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the roomhe self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying powef the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besideshe sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and angeutomatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasir Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it waenerally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that althougoldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and housand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapersn books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to theneral gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were--in spite of all thisis influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupeaiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteurcting under his directions were not unmasked by the Thought Policee was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an underground network oonspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State. The Brotherhood, itame was supposed to be. There were also whispered stories of a terriblook, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the authond which circulated clandestinely here and there. It was a book without itle. People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one knef such things only through vague rumours. Neither the Brotherhood noHE BOOK was a subject that any ordinary Party member would mention ihere was a way of avoiding it.
In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy. People were leaping up anown in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an efforo drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen. The littlandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening anhutting like that of a landed fish. Even O'Brien's heavy face was flushede was sitting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling anuivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave. Thark-haired girl behind Winston had begun crying out 'Swine! Swine! Swine!nd suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at thcreen. It struck Goldstein's nose and bounced off; the voice continuenexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with ththers and kicking his heel violently against the rung of his chair. Thorrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged tct a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid joininn. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary. A hideoucstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smasaces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group oeople like an electric current, turning one even against one's will int grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object tnother like the flame of a blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston's hatreas not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, againsig Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments hieart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardiaf truth and sanity in a world of lies. And yet the very next instant has at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldsteieemed to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of Birother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, anvincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordef Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, anhe doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinistenchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structurf civilization.
It was even possible, at moments, to switch one's hatred this way or thay a voluntary act. Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which onrenches one's head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeden transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-haireirl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his minde would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her nakeo a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He woulavish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Better than beforeoreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her. He hated her becaushe was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed witer and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, whiceemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odioucarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chastity.
The Hate rose to its climax. The voice of Goldstein had become an actuaheep's bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheephen the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemeo be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, aneeming to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of theople in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats. Bun the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, thostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-hairedlack-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that almost filled up the screen. Nobody heard what Big Brother was sayingt was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that arttered in the din of battle, not distinguishable individually buestoring confidence by the fact of being spoken. Then the face of Birother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stoout in bold capitals:
  WAR IS PEAC FREEDOM IS SLAVER IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH
But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on thcreen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone's eyeballs waoo vivid to wear off immediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flunerself forward over the back of the chair in front of her. With remulous murmur that sounded like 'My Saviour!' she extended her armowards the screen. Then she buried her face in her hands. It was apparenhat she was uttering a prayer.
At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slowhythmical chant of 'B-B!...B-B!'--over and over again, very slowly, with ong pause between the first 'B' and the second--a heavy, murmurous soundomehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear thtamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms. For perhaps as much ahirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard ioments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdond majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noiseinston's entrails seemed to grow cold. In the Two Minutes Hate he coulot help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting oB-B!...B-B!' always filled him with horror. Of course he chanted with thest: it was impossible to do otherwise. To dissemble your feelings, tontrol your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctiveaction. But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which thxpression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him. And it waxactly at this moment that the significant thing happened--if, indeedt did happen.
Momentarily he caught O'Brien's eye. O'Brien had stood up. He had takeff his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose witis characteristic gesture. But there was a fraction of a second wheheir eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew--yes, hNEW!--that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as himself. An unmistakablessage had passed. It was as though their two minds had opened and thhoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes. 'I aith you,' O'Brien seemed to be saying to him. 'I know precisely what yore feeling. I know all about your contempt, your hatred, your disgustut don't worry, I am on your side!' And then the flash of intelligencas gone, and O'Brien's face was as inscrutable as everybody else's.
That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened. Sucncidents never had any sequel. All that they did was to keep alive in hihe belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of tharty. Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true aftell--perhaps the Brotherhood really existed! It was impossible, in spitf the endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that throtherhood was not simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some dayot. There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anythinr nothing: snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatoralls--once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hanhich had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It was aluesswork: very likely he had imagined everything. He had gone back to hiubicle without looking at O'Brien again. The idea of following up theiomentary contact hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivablangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it. For a second, tweconds, they had exchanged an equivocal glance, and that was the end ohe story. But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness ihich one had to live.
Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out a belch. The gias rising from his stomach.
His eyes re-focused on the page. He discovered that while he sat helplesslusing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action. And it wao longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slioluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals--
  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHE DOWN WITH BIG BROTHE DOWN WITH BIG BROTHE DOWN WITH BIG BROTHE DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER
over and over again, filling half a page.
He could not help feeling a twinge of panic. It was absurd, since thriting of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initiact of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out thpoiled pages and abandon the enterprise altogether.
He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless. Whether hrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, mado difference. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not gn with it, made no difference. The Thought Police would get him just thame. He had committed--would still have committed, even if he had neveet pen to paper--the essential crime that contained all others in itselfhoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could boncealed for ever. You might dodge successfully for a while, even foears, but sooner or later they were bound to get you.
It was always at night--the arrests invariably happened at night. Thudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lightlaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed. In the vasajority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest. Peoplimply disappeared, always during the night. Your name was removed from thegisters, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, youne-time existence was denied and then forgotten. You were abolishednnihilated: VAPORIZED was the usual word.
For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He began writing in urried untidy scrawl:
   theyll shoot me i don't care theyll shoot me in the back of the neck ont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of theck i dont care down with big brother----
He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid dowhe pen. The next moment he started violently. There was a knocking ahe door.
Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that whoever it waight go away after a single attempt. But no, the knocking was repeatedhe worst thing of all would be to delay. His heart was thumping like rum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless. He gop and moved heavily towards the door.
Chapter 2
As he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left thiary open on the table. DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written all over itn letters almost big enough to be legible across the room. It was anconceivably stupid thing to have done. But, he realized, even in hianic he had not wanted to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the boohile the ink was wet.
He drew in his breath and opened the door. Instantly a warm wave of relielowed through him. A colourless, crushed-looking woman, with wispy haind a lined face, was standing outside.
'Oh, comrade,' she began in a dreary, whining sort of voice, 'I thought eard you come in. Do you think you could come across and have a look aur kitchen sink? It's got blocked up and----'
It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor. ('Mrs' wa word somewhat discountenanced by the Party--you were supposed to calveryone 'comrade'--but with some women one used it instinctively.) She wa woman of about thirty, but looking much older. One had the impressiohat there was dust in the creases of her face. Winston followed her dowhe passage. These amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irritationictory Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and weralling to pieces. The plaster flaked constantly from ceilings and wallshe pipes burst in every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there wanow, the heating system was usually running at half steam when it was nolosed down altogether from motives of economy. Repairs, except what yoould do for yourself, had to be sanctioned by remote committees whicere liable to hold up even the mending of a window-pane for two years.
'Of course it's only because Tom isn't home,' said Mrs Parsons vaguely.
The Parsons' flat was bigger than Winston's, and dingy in a differenay. Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though thlace had just been visited by some large violent animal. Gamempedimenta--hockey-sticks, boxing-gloves, a burst football, a pair oweaty shorts turned inside out--lay all over the floor, and on thable there was a litter of dirty dishes and dog-eared exercise-booksn the walls were scarlet banners of the Youth League and the Spies, an full-sized poster of Big Brother. There was the usual boiled-cabbagmell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a sharpeeek of sweat, which--one knew this at the first sniff, though it waard to say how--was the sweat of some person not present at the momentn another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper warying to keep tune with the military music which was still issuinrom the telescreen.
'It's the children,' said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-apprehensive glanct the door. 'They haven't been out today. And of course----'
She had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the middle. The kitcheink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelorse than ever of cabbage. Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joinf the pipe. He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which walways liable to start him coughing. Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly.
'Of course if Tom was home he'd put it right in a moment,' she saidHe loves anything like that. He's ever so good with his hands, Tom is.'
Parsons was Winston's fellow-employee at the Ministry of Truth. He wa fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecilnthusiasms--one of those completely unquestioning, devoted drudges ohom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Partepended. At thirty-five he had just been unwillingly evicted from thouth League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed ttay on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age. At the Ministre was employed in some subordinate post for which intelligence was noequired, but on the other hand he was a leading figure on the Sportommittee and all the other committees engaged in organizing communitikes, spontaneous demonstrations, savings campaigns, and voluntarctivities generally. He would inform you with quiet pride, between whifff his pipe, that he had put in an appearance at the Community Centre evervening for the past four years. An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort onconscious testimony to the strenuousness of his life, followed him abouherever he went, and even remained behind him after he had gone.
'Have you got a spanner?' said Winston, fiddling with the nut on thngle-joint.
'A spanner,' said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming invertebrate. 'I don'now, I'm sure. Perhaps the children----'
There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as thhildren charged into the living-room. Mrs Parsons brought the spannerinston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human haihat had blocked up the pipe. He cleaned his fingers as best he could ihe cold water from the tap and went back into the other room.
'Up with your hands!' yelled a savage voice.
A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the tablnd was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sisterbout two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of woodoth of them were dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirts, and reeckerchiefs which were the uniform of the Spies. Winston raised his handbove his head, but with an uneasy feeling, so vicious was the boy'emeanour, that it was not altogether a game.
'You're a traitor!' yelled the boy. 'You're a thought-criminal! You're urasian spy! I'll shoot you, I'll vaporize you, I'll send you to the salines!'
Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting 'Traitor!' anThought-criminal!' the little girl imitating her brother in everovement. It was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling oiger cubs which will soon grow up into man-eaters. There was a sort oalculating ferocity in the boy's eye, a quite evident desire to hit oick Winston and a consciousness of being very nearly big enough to do sot was a good job it was not a real pistol he was holding, Winston thought.
Mrs Parsons' eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the children, and bacgain. In the better light of the living-room he noticed with intereshat there actually was dust in the creases of her face.
'They do get so noisy,' she said. 'They're disappointed because theouldn't go to see the hanging, that's what it is. I'm too busy to takhem. and Tom won't be back from work in time.'
'Why can't we go and see the hanging?' roared the boy in his huge voice.
'Want to see the hanging! Want to see the hanging!' chanted the littlirl, still capering round.
Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in thark that evening, Winston remembered. This happened about once a monthnd was a popular spectacle. Children always clamoured to be taken to set. He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door. But he had noone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck agonizingly painful blow. It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbento him. He spun round just in time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her soack into the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult.
'Goldstein!' bellowed the boy as the door closed on him. But what mostruck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman's greyish face.
Back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at thable again, still rubbing his neck. The music from the telescreen hatopped. Instead, a clipped military voice was reading out, with a sort orutal relish, a description of the armaments of the new Floating Fortreshich had just been anchored between Iceland and the Faroe Islands.
With those children, he thought, that wretched woman must lead a life oerror. Another year, two years, and they would be watching her nighnd day for symptoms of unorthodoxy. Nearly all children nowadays werorrible. What was worst of all was that by means of such organizations ahe Spies they were systematically turned into ungovernable little savagesnd yet this produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against thiscipline of the Party. On the contrary, they adored the Party anverything connected with it. The songs, the processions, the banners, thiking, the drilling with dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worshif Big Brother--it was all a sort of glorious game to them. All theierocity was turned outwards, against the enemies of the State, againsoreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals. It was almost normaor people over thirty to be frightened of their own children. And witood reason, for hardly a week passed in which 'The Times' did not carr paragraph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak--'child heroas the phrase generally used--had overheard some compromising remarnd denounced its parents to the Thought Police.
The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off. He picked up his pealf-heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to writn the diary. Suddenly he began thinking of O'Brien again.
Years ago--how long was it? Seven years it must be--he had dreamed that has walking through a pitch-dark room. And someone sitting to one side oim had said as he passed: 'We shall meet in the place where there is narkness.' It was said very quietly, almost casually--a statement, not ommand. He had walked on without pausing. What was curious was that at thime, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him. It wanly later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance. Hould not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream thae had seen O'Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he hairst identified the voice as O'Brien's. But at any rate the identificatioxisted. It was O'Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark.
Winston had never been able to feel sure--even after this morning's flasf the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether O'Brien was a frienr an enemy. Nor did it even seem to matter greatly. There was a link onderstanding between them, more important than affection or partisanshipWe shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' he had saidinston did not know what it meant, only that in some way or another iould come true.
The voice from the telescreen paused. A trumpet call, clear and beautifulloated into the stagnant air. The voice continued raspingly:
'Attention! Your attention, please! A newsflash has this moment arriverom the Malabar front. Our forces in South India have won a gloriouictory. I am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting maell bring the war within measurable distance of its end. Here is thewsflash----'
Bad news coming, thought Winston. And sure enough, following on a gorescription of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figuref killed and prisoners, came the announcement that, as from next weekhe chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty.
Winston belched again. The gin was wearing off, leaving a deflated feelinghe telescreen--perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown themory of the lost chocolate--crashed into 'Oceania, 'tis for thee'. Yoere supposed to stand to attention. However, in his present position has invisible.
'Oceania, 'tis for thee' gave way to lighter music. Winston walked over the window, keeping his back to the telescreen. The day was still cold anlear. Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberatinoar. About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London aresent.
Down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro, and thord INGSOC fitfully appeared and vanished. Ingsoc. The sacred principlef Ingsoc. Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past. He felt ahough he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom, lost in onstrous world where he himself was the monster. He was alone. The pasas dead, the future was unimaginable. What certainty had he that a singluman creature now living was on his side? And what way of knowing that thominion of the Party would not endure FOR EVER? Like an answer, the threlogans on the white face of the Ministry of Truth came back to him:
  WAR IS PEAC FREEDOM IS SLAVER IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH
He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket. There, too, in tinlear lettering, the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face ohe coin the head of Big Brother. Even from the coin the eyes pursued youn coins, on stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and ohe wrappings of a cigarette packet--everywhere. Always the eyes watchinou and the voice enveloping you. Asleep or awake, working or eatingndoors or out of doors, in the bath or in bed--no escape. Nothing was youwn except the few cubic centimetres inside your skull.
The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of Truthith the light no longer shining on them, looked grim as the loopholes of ortress. His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape. It was totrong, it could not be stormed. A thousand rocket bombs would not battet down. He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary. For thuture, for the past--for an age that might be imaginary. And in front oim there lay not death but annihilation. The diary would be reduced tshes and himself to vapour. Only the Thought Police would read what he haritten, before they wiped it out of existence and out of memory. How coulou make appeal to the future when not a trace of you, not even anonymous word scribbled on a piece of paper, could physically survive?
The telescreen struck fourteen. He must leave in ten minutes. He had to back at work by fourteen-thirty.
Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into hime was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear. But song as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not brokent was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried ohe human heritage. He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote:
   To the future or to the past, to a time when thought is free, when mere different from one another and do not live alone--to a time when trutxists and what is done cannot be undone  From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age oig Brother, from the age of doublethink--greetings!
He was already dead, he reflected. It seemed to him that it was only nowhen he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had takehe decisive step. The consequences of every act are included in the actself. He wrote:
   Thoughtcrime does not entail death: thoughtcrime IS death.
Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became important to stalive as long as possible. Two fingers of his right hand were inkstainedt was exactly the kind of detail that might betray you. Some nosing zealon the Ministry (a woman, probably: someone like the little sandy-haireoman or the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department) might starondering why he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he hased an old-fashioned pen, WHAT he had been writing--and then drop a hinn the appropriate quarter. He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbehe ink away with the gritty dark-brown soap which rasped your skin likandpaper and was therefore well adapted for this purpose.
He put the diary away in the drawer. It was quite useless to think oiding it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence haeen discovered. A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious. With thip of his finger he picked up an identifiable grain of whitish dust aneposited it on the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shakeff if the book was moved.
Chapter 3
Winston was dreaming of his mother.
He must, he thought, have been ten or eleven years old when his mother haisappeared. She was a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with sloovements and magnificent fair hair. His father he remembered more vaguels dark and thin, dressed always in neat dark clothes (Winston rememberespecially the very thin soles of his father's shoes) and wearinpectacles. The two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in onf the first great purges of the fifties.
At this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath himith his young sister in her arms. He did not remember his sister at allxcept as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyesoth of them were looking up at him. They were down in some subterranealace--the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave--but ias a place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwardshey were in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through tharkening water. There was still air in the saloon, they could still seim and he them, but all the while they were sinking down, down into threen waters which in another moment must hide them from sight for evere was out in the light and air while they were being sucked down to deathnd they were down there because he was up here. He knew it and they knet, and he could see the knowledge in their faces. There was no reproacither in their faces or in their hearts, only the knowledge that theust die in order that he might remain alive, and that this was part ohe unavoidable order of things.
He could not remember what had happened, but he knew in his dream that iome way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to hiwn. It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristiream scenery, are a continuation of one's intellectual life, and in whicne becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuablfter one is awake. The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that hiother's death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sorrowful i way that was no longer possible. Tragedy, he perceived, belonged to thncient time, to a time when there was still privacy, love, and friendshipnd when the members of a family stood by one another without needing tnow the reason. His mother's memory tore at his heart because she had dieoving him, when he was too young and selfish to love her in return, anecause somehow, he did not remember how, she had sacrificed herself to onception of loyalty that was private and unalterable. Such things, haw, could not happen today. Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, buo dignity of emotion, no deep or complex sorrows. All this he seemed tee in the large eyes of his mother and his sister, looking up at hihrough the green water, hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking.
Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening whehe slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground. The landscape that he waooking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certaihether or not he had seen it in the real world. In his waking thoughts halled it the Golden Country. It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with oot-track wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the raggeedge on the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees werwaying very faintly in the breeze, their leaves just stirring in densasses like women's hair. Somewhere near at hand, though out of sighthere was a clear, slow-moving stream where dace were swimming in thools under the willow trees.
The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field. Withat seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung theisdainfully aside. Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desirn him, indeed he barely looked at it. What overwhelmed him in that instanas admiration for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes asideith its grace and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture whole system of thought, as though Big Brother and the Party and thhought Police could all be swept into nothingness by a single splendiovement of the arm. That too was a gesture belonging to the ancient timeinston woke up with the word 'Shakespeare' on his lips.
The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued ohe same note for thirty seconds. It was nought seven fifteen, getting-uime for office workers. Winston wrenched his body out of bed--naked, fo member of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annuallynd a suit of pyjamas was 600--and seized a dingy singlet and a pair ohorts that were lying across a chair. The Physical Jerks would begin ihree minutes. The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fihich nearly always attacked him soon after waking up. It emptied his lungo completely that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his bacnd taking a series of deep gasps. His veins had swelled with the effort ohe cough, and the varicose ulcer had started itching.
'Thirty to forty group!' yapped a piercing female voice. 'Thirty to fortroup! Take your places, please. Thirties to forties!'
Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, upon which thmage of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic anym-shoes, had already appeared.
'Arms bending and stretching!' she rapped out. 'Take your time by me. ONEwo, three, four! ONE, two, three, four! Come on, comrades, put a bit oife into it! ONE, two, three four! ONE two, three, four!...'
The pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston's mind thmpression made by his dream, and the rhythmic movements of the exercisestored it somewhat. As he mechanically shot his arms back and forthearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered propeuring the Physical Jerks, he was struggling to think his way backward inthe dim period of his early childhood. It was extraordinarily difficulteyond the late fifties everything faded. When there were no externaecords that you could refer to, even the outline of your own life losts sharpness. You remembered huge events which had quite probably noappened, you remembered the detail of incidents without being able tecapture their atmosphere, and there were long blank periods to which yoould assign nothing. Everything had been different then. Even the names oountries, and their shapes on the map, had been different. Airstrip Oneor instance, had not been so called in those days: it had been callengland or Britain, though London, he felt fairly certain, had always beealled London.
Winston could not definitely remember a time when his country had not beet war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval oeace during his childhood, because one of his early memories was of an aiaid which appeared to take everyone by surprise. Perhaps it was the timhen the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester. He did not remember the raitself, but he did remember his father's hand clutching his own as theurried down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and roun spiral staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearieis legs that he began whimpering and they had to stop and rest. Hiother, in her slow, dreamy way, was following a long way behind them. Shas carrying his baby sister--or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankethat she was carrying: he was not certain whether his sister had been borhen. Finally they had emerged into a noisy, crowded place which he haealized to be a Tube station.
There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and otheeople, packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one abovhe other. Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place ohe floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side bide on a bunk. The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth caushed back from very white hair: his face was scarlet and his eyes werlue and full of tears. He reeked of gin. It seemed to breathe out of hikin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears wellinrom his eyes were pure gin. But though slightly drunk he was alsuffering under some grief that was genuine and unbearable. In his childisay Winston grasped that some terrible thing, something that was beyonorgiveness and could never be remedied, had just happened. It also seemeo him that he knew what it was. Someone whom the old man loved--a littlranddaughter, perhaps--had been killed. Every few minutes the old man kepepeating:
'We didn't ought to 'ave trusted 'em. I said so, Ma, didn't I? That's whaomes of trusting 'em. I said so all along. We didn't ought to 'ave trustehe buggers.'
But which buggers they didn't ought to have trusted Winston could not noemember.
Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictlpeaking it had not always been the same war. For several months during hihildhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, somf which he remembered vividly. But to trace out the history of the wholeriod, to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have beetterly impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever madention of any other alignment than the existing one. At this moment, foxample, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia ann alliance with Eastasia. In no public or private utterance was it evedmitted that the three powers had at any time been grouped along differenines. Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceaniad been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia. But that waerely a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess becausis memory was not satisfactorily under control. Officially the change oartners had never happened. Oceania was at war with Eurasia: thereforceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the moment alwayepresented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or futurgreement with him was impossible.
The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as horced his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they weryrating their bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to bood for the back muscles)--the frightening thing was that it might all brue. If the Party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this ohat event, IT NEVER HAPPENED--that, surely, was more terrifying than merorture and death?
The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia. Heinston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as shor time as four years ago. But where did that knowledge exist? Only in hiwn consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated. And if althers accepted the lie which the Party imposed--if all records told thame tale--then the lie passed into history and became truth. 'Who controlhe past,' ran the Party slogan, 'controls the future: who controls thresent controls the past.' And yet the past, though of its naturlterable, never had been altered. Whatever was true now was true froverlasting to everlasting. It was quite simple. All that was needed wan unending series of victories over your own memory. 'Reality control'hey called it: in Newspeak, 'doublethink'.
'Stand easy!' barked the instructress, a little more genially.
Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with airis mind slid away into the labyrinthine world of doublethink. To knond not to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while tellinarefully constructed lies, to hold simultaneously two opinions whicancelled out, knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both ohem, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claio it, to believe that democracy was impossible and that the Party was thuardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, theo draw it back into memory again at the moment when it was needed, anhen promptly to forget it again: and above all, to apply the same proceso the process itself. That was the ultimate subtlety: consciously tnduce unconsciousness, and then, once again, to become unconscious ohe act of hypnosis you had just performed. Even to understand the wordoublethink' involved the use of doublethink.
The instructress had called them to attention again. 'And now let's sehich of us can touch our toes!' she said enthusiastically. 'Right overom the hips, please, comrades. ONE-two! ONE-two!...'
Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way frois heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughinit. The half-pleasant quality went out of his meditations. The past, heflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed. Foow could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed necord outside your own memory? He tried to remember in what year he hairst heard mention of Big Brother. He thought it must have been at somime in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain. In the Partistories, of course, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of thevolution since its very earliest days. His exploits had been graduallushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulouorld of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in theitrange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of London in grealeaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides. There was nnowing how much of this legend was true and how much invented. Winstoould not even remember at what date the Party itself had come intxistence. He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc befor960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form--'English Socialism'hat is to say--it had been current earlier. Everything melted into mistometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite lie. It was norue, for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that tharty had invented aeroplanes. He remembered aeroplanes since his earlieshildhood. But you could prove nothing. There was never any evidence. Jusnce in his whole life he had held in his hands unmistakable documentarroof of the falsification of an historical fact. And on that occasion----
'Smith!' screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.es, YOU! Bend lower, please! You can do better than that. You're norying. Lower, please! THAT'S better, comrade. Now stand at ease, thhole squad, and watch me.'
A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston's body. His facemained completely inscrutable. Never show dismay! Never show resentment single flicker of the eyes could give you away. He stood watching whilhe instructress raised her arms above her head and--one could not saracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency--bent over anucked the first joint of her fingers under her toes.
'THERE, comrades! THAT'S how I want to see you doing it. Watch me again'm thirty-nine and I've had four children. Now look.' She bent over againYou see MY knees aren't bent. You can all do it if you want to,' she addes she straightened herself up. 'Anyone under forty-five is perfectlapable of touching his toes. We don't all have the privilege of fightinn the front line, but at least we can all keep fit. Remember our boys ohe Malabar front! And the sailors in the Floating Fortresses! Just thinhat THEY have to put up with. Now try again. That's better, comradehat's MUCH better,' she added encouragingly as Winston, with a violenunge, succeeded in touching his toes with knees unbent, for the firsime in several years.
Chapter 4
With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of thelescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day's work startedinston pulled the speakwrite towards him, blew the dust from itouthpiece, and put on his spectacles. Then he unrolled and clippeogether four small cylinders of paper which had already flopped out ohe pneumatic tube on the right-hand side of his desk.
In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices. To the right of thpeakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for written messages, to the left, arger one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach oinston's arm, a large oblong slit protected by a wire grating. This lasas for the disposal of waste paper. Similar slits existed in thousands oens of thousands throughout the building, not only in every room but ahort intervals in every corridor. For some reason they were nicknameemory holes. When one knew that any document was due for destruction, oven when one saw a scrap of waste paper lying about, it was an automatiction to lift the flap of the nearest memory hole and drop it inhereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air to the enormouurnaces which were hidden somewhere in the recesses of the building.
Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled. Eacontained a message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviateargon--not actually Newspeak, but consistinargely of Newspeak words--which was used in the Ministry for internaurposes. They ran:
times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify
times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue
times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify
times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewritullwise upsub antefiling
With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth message asidet was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with lasthe other three were routine matters, though the second one would probablean some tedious wading through lists of figures.
Winston dialled 'back numbers' on the telescreen and called for thppropriate issues of 'The Times', which slid out of the pneumatic tubfter only a few minutes' delay. The messages he had received referred trticles or news items which for one reason or another it was thoughecessary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify. Foxample, it appeared from 'The Times' of the seventeenth of March that Birother, in his speech of the previous day, had predicted that the Soutndian front would remain quiet but that a Eurasian offensive would shortle launched in North Africa. As it happened, the Eurasian Higher Commanad launched its offensive in South India and left North Africa alone. Ias therefore necessary to rewrite a paragraph of Big Brother's speech, iuch a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually happened. Ogain, 'The Times' of the nineteenth of December had published the officiaorecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in thourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninthree-Year Plan. Today's issue contained a statement of the actual outputrom which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grosslrong. Winston's job was to rectify the original figures by making thegree with the later ones. As for the third message, it referred to a verimple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes. As shor time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promisa 'categorical pledge' were the official words) that there would bo reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984. Actually, as Winstoas aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammeo twenty at the end of the present week. All that was needed was tubstitute for the original promise a warning that it would probably becessary to reduce the ration at some time in April.
As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped hipeakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of 'The Times' and pushehem into the pneumatic tube. Then, with a movement which was as nearly aossible unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notehat he himself had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to bevoured by the flames.
What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, hid not know in detail, but he did know in general terms. As soon as alhe corrections which happened to be necessary in any particular numbef 'The Times' had been assembled and collated, that number would beprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed ohe files in its stead. This process of continuous alteration was applieot only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posterseaflets, films, sound-tracks, cartoons, photographs--to every kind oiterature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political odeological significance. Day by day and almost minute by minute the pasas brought up to date. In this way every prediction made by the Partould be shown by documentary evidence to have been correct, nor was antem of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with theeds of the moment, ever allowed to remain on record. All history wa palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as waecessary. In no case would it have been possible, once the deed was doneo prove that any falsification had taken place. The largest section ohe Records Department, far larger than the one on which Winston workedonsisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect alopies of books, newspapers, and other documents which had been supersedend were due for destruction. A number of 'The Times' which might, becausf changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Birother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearints original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it. Books, alsoere recalled and rewritten again and again, and were invariably reissueithout any admission that any alteration had been made. Even the writtenstructions which Winston received, and which he invariably got rid os soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act oorgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errorsisprints, or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in thnterests of accuracy.
But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty'igures, it was not even forgery. It was merely the substitution of oniece of nonsense for another. Most of the material that you were dealinith had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind oonnexion that is contained in a direct lie. Statistics were just as muc fantasy in their original version as in their rectified version. A greaeal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head. Foxample, the Ministry of Plenty's forecast had estimated the output ooots for the quarter at 145 million pairs. The actual output was given aixty-two millions. Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, markehe figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claihat the quota had been overfulfilled. In any case, sixty-two millions wao nearer the truth than fifty-seven millions, or than 145 millions. Verikely no boots had been produced at all. Likelier still, nobody kneow many had been produced, much less cared. All one knew was that everuarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhapalf the population of Oceania went barefoot. And so it was with everlass of recorded fact, great or small. Everything faded away into hadow-world in which, finally, even the date of the year had becomncertain.
Winston glanced across the hall. In the corresponding cubicle on the otheide a small, precise-looking, dark-chinned man named Tillotson was workinteadily away, with a folded newspaper on his knee and his mouth very closo the mouthpiece of the speakwrite. He had the air of trying to keep whae was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. He looked upnd his spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston's direction.
Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employen. People in the Records Department did not readily talk about their jobsn the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and itndless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwriteshere were quite a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by namehough he daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors oesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. He knew that in the cubicle nexo him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply aracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had beeaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed. There was ertain fitness in this, since her own husband had been vaporized a couplf years earlier. And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffectual, dreamreature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talenor juggling with rhymes and metres, was engaged in producing garbleersions--definitive texts, they were called--of poems which had becomdeologically offensive, but which for one reason or another were to betained in the anthologies. And this hall, with its fifty workers ohereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, in thuge complexity of the Records Department. Beyond, above, below, were othewarms of workers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs. There werhe huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography expertsnd their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs. Theras the tele-programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and iteams of actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices. Therere the armies of reference clerks whose job was simply to draw up listf books and periodicals which were due for recall. There were the vasepositories where the corrected documents were stored, and the hiddeurnaces where the original copies were destroyed. And somewhere or otheruite anonymous, there were the directing brains who co-ordinated the wholffort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that thiragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the otheubbed out of existence.
And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch ohe Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the pasut to supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbookselescreen programmes, plays, novels--with every conceivable kind onformation, instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a sloganrom a lyric poem to a biological treatise, and from a child'pelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary. And the Ministry had not only tupply the multifarious needs of the party, but also to repeat the wholperation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat. Theras a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletariaiterature, music, drama, and entertainment generally. Here were produceubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime anstrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, anentimental songs which were composed entirely by mechanical means on pecial kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator. There was eve whole sub-section--Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak--engaged iroducing the lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealeackets and which no Party member, other than those who worked on itas permitted to look at.
Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston waorking, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them beforhe Two Minutes Hate interrupted him. When the Hate was over he returneo his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed thpeakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to hiain job of the morning.
Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in his work. Most of it was edious routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult anntricate that you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of athematical problem--delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothino guide you except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and youstimate of what the Party wanted you to say. Winston was good at this kinf thing. On occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification oThe Times' leading articles, which were written entirely in Newspeake unrolled the message that he had set aside earlier. It ran:
   times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersonewrite fullwise upsub antefiling
In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered:
The reporting of Big Brother's Order for the Day in 'The Times' of Decemberd 1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existenersons. Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authoritefore filing.
Winston read through the offending article. Big Brother's Order for thay, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of arganization known as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforto the sailors in the Floating Fortresses. A certain Comrade Withers, rominent member of the Inner Party, had been singled out for speciaention and awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Seconlass.
Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons givenne could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, buhere had been no report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreenhat was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offenders te put on trial or even publicly denounced. The great purges involvinhousands of people, with public trials of traitors and thought-criminalho made abject confession of their crimes and were afterwards executedere special show-pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple oears. More commonly, people who had incurred the displeasure of tharty simply disappeared and were never heard of again. One never had thmallest clue as to what had happened to them. In some cases they mighot even be dead. Perhaps thirty people personally known to Winston, noounting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another.
Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip. In the cubiclcross the way Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively oveis speakwrite. He raised his head for a moment: again the hostilpectacle-flash. Winston wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engagen the same job as himself. It was perfectly possible. So tricky a piecf work would never be entrusted to a single person: on the other hando turn it over to a committee would be to admit openly that an act oabrication was taking place. Very likely as many as a dozen people werow working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually saidnd presently some master brain in the Inner Party would select thiersion or that, would re-edit it and set in motion the complex processef cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen liould pass into the permanent records and become truth.
Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced. Perhaps it was foorruption or incompetence. Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid o too-popular subordinate. Perhaps Withers or someone close to him haeen suspected of heretical tendencies. Or perhaps--what was likeliest oll--the thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were ecessary part of the mechanics of government. The only real clue lay ihe words 'refs unpersons', which indicated that Withers was already deadou could not invariably assume this to be the case when people werrrested. Sometimes they were released and allowed to remain at libertor as much as a year or two years before being executed. Very occasionallome person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostleappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hundreds others by his testimony before vanishing, this time for ever. Withersowever, was already an UNPERSON. He did not exist: he had never existedinston decided that it would not be enough simply to reverse the tendencf Big Brother's speech. It was better to make it deal with somethinotally unconnected with its original subject.
He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors anhought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent ictory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninthree-Year Plan, might complicate the records too much. What was needeas a piece of pure fantasy. Suddenly there sprang into his mind, readade as it were, the image of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recentlied in battle, in heroic circumstances. There were occasions when Birother devoted his Order for the Day to commemorating some humbleank-and-file Party member whose life and death he held up as an examplorthy to be followed. Today he should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy. It warue that there was no such person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines orint and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him intxistence.
Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwrite towards him anegan dictating in Big Brother's familiar style: a style at once militarnd pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and theromptly answering them ('What lessons do we learn from this factomrades? The lesson--which is also one of the fundamental principlef Ingsoc--that,' etc., etc.), easy to imitate.
At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, ub-machine gun, and a model helicopter. At six--a year early, by a speciaelaxation of the rules--he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been roop leader. At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Policfter overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminaendencies. At seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junionti-Sex League. At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which haeen adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, hailled thirty-one Eurasian prisoners in one burst. At twenty-three he haerished in action. Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over thndian Ocean with important despatches, he had weighted his body with hiachine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatchend all--an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplatithout feelings of envy. Big Brother added a few remarks on the puritnd single-mindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life. He was a total abstainend a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasiumnd had taken a vow of celibacy, believing marriage and the care of amily to be incompatible with a twenty-four-hour-a-day devotion to dutye had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, ano aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-dowf spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and traitors generally.
Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order oonspicuous Merit: in the end he decided against it because of thnnecessary cross-referencing that it would entail.
Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle. Somethineemed to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same jos himself. There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adoptedut he felt a profound conviction that it would be his own. Comrade Ogilvynimagined an hour ago, was now a fact. It struck him as curious that yoould create dead men but not living ones. Comrade Ogilvy, who had nevexisted in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act oorgery was forgotten, he would exist just as authentically, and upon thame evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar.
Chapter 5
In the low-ceilinged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerkelowly forward. The room was already very full and deafeningly noisy. Frohe grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a souetallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin. Ohe far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole in the wallhere gin could be bought at ten cents the large nip.
'Just the man I was looking for,' said a voice at Winston's back.
He turned round. It was his friend Syme, who worked in the Researcepartment. Perhaps 'friend' was not exactly the right word. You did noave friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whosociety was pleasanter than that of others. Syme was a philologist, pecialist in Newspeak. Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of expertow engaged in compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionarye was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and largerotuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to searcour face closely while he was speaking to you.
'I wanted to ask you whether you'd got any razor blades,' he said.
'Not one!' said Winston with a sort of guilty haste. 'I've tried all ovehe place. They don't exist any longer.'
Everyone kept asking you for razor blades. Actually he had two unused onehich he was hoarding up. There had been a famine of them for months pastt any given moment there was some necessary article which the Party shopere unable to supply. Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darninool, sometimes it was shoelaces; at present it was razor blades. You coulnly get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively ohe 'free' market.
'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he added untruthfully.
The queue gave another jerk forward. As they halted he turned and faceyme again. Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the enf the counter.
'Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday?' said Syme.
'I was working,' said Winston indifferently. 'I shall see it on thlicks, I suppose.'
'A very inadequate substitute,' said Syme.
His mocking eyes roved over Winston's face. 'I know you,' the eyes seemeo say, 'I see through you. I know very well why you didn't go to sehose prisoners hanged.' In an intellectual way, Syme was venomouslrthodox. He would talk with a disagreeable gloating satisfaction oelicopter raids on enemy villages, and trials and confessions ohought-criminals, the executions in the cellars of the Ministry of Lovealking to him was largely a matter of getting him away from such subjectnd entangling him, if possible, in the technicalities of Newspeak, ohich he was authoritative and interesting. Winston turned his head ittle aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes.
'It was a good hanging,' said Syme reminiscently. 'I think it spoils ihen they tie their feet together. I like to see them kicking. And abovll, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue--a quite brighlue. That's the detail that appeals to me.'
'Nex', please!' yelled the white-aproned prole with the ladle.
Winston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille. On to each waumped swiftly the regulation lunch--a metal pannikin of pinkish-grey stew hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, anne saccharine tablet.
'There's a table over there, under that telescreen,' said Syme. 'Let's picp a gin on the way.'
The gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs. They threadeheir way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to thetal-topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit. Winston took up hiug of gin, paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped thily-tasting stuff down. When he had winked the tears out of his eyes huddenly discovered that he was hungry. He began swallowing spoonfuls ohe stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of sponginkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat. Neither of thepoke again till they had emptied their pannikins. From the table ainston's left, a little behind his back, someone was talking rapidly anontinuously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, whicierced the general uproar of the room.
'How is the Dictionary getting on?' said Winston, raising his voice tvercome the noise.
'Slowly,' said Syme. 'I'm on the adjectives. It's fascinating.'
He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak. He pushed hiannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and hiheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speaithout shouting.
'The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,' he said. 'We're gettinhe language into its final shape--the shape it's going to have when nobodpeaks anything else. When we've finished with it, people like you wilave to learn it all over again. You think, I dare say, that our chief jos inventing new words. But not a bit of it! We're destroying words--scoref them, hundreds of them, every day. We're cutting the language down the bone. The Eleventh Edition won't contain a single word that will becombsolete before the year 2050.'
He bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, theontinued speaking, with a sort of pedant's passion. His thin dark facad become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and growlmost dreamy.
'It's a beautiful thing, the destruction of words. Of course the greaastage is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hundreds of nounhat can be got rid of as well. It isn't only the synonyms; there are alshe antonyms. After all, what justification is there for a word which iimply the opposite of some other word? A word contains its opposite itself. Take "good", for instance. If you have a word like "good", whaeed is there for a word like "bad"? "Ungood" will do just as well--betterecause it's an exact opposite, which the other is not. Or again, if yoant a stronger version of "good", what sense is there in having a wholtring of vague useless words like "excellent" and "splendid" and all thest of them? "Plusgood" covers the meaning, or "doubleplusgood" if yoant something stronger still. Of course we use those forms already. bun the final version of Newspeak there'll be nothing else. In the end thhole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words--ieality, only one word. Don't you see the beauty of that, Winston? It wa.B.'s idea originally, of course,' he added as an afterthought.
A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston's face at the mention oig Brother. Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack onthusiasm.
'You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,' he said almosadly. 'Even when you write it you're still thinking in Oldspeak. I've reaome of those pieces that you write in "The Times" occasionally. They'rood enough, but they're translations. In your heart you'd prefer to stico Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaningou don't grasp the beauty of the destruction of words. Do you know thaewspeak is the only language in the world whose vocabulary gets smallevery year?'
Winston did know that, of course. He smiled, sympathetically he hoped, norusting himself to speak. Syme bit off another fragment of thark-coloured bread, chewed it briefly, and went on:
'Don't you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range ohought? In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally impossibleecause there will be no words in which to express it. Every concept thaan ever be needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaninigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgottenlready, in the Eleventh Edition, we're not far from that point. But throcess will still be continuing long after you and I are dead. Every yeaewer and fewer words, and the range of consciousness always a littlmaller. Even now, of course, there's no reason or excuse for committinhoughtcrime. It's merely a question of self-discipline, reality-controlut in the end there won't be any need even for that. The Revolution wile complete when the language is perfect. Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsos Newspeak,' he added with a sort of mystical satisfaction. 'Has it eveccurred to you, Winston, that by the year 2050, at the very latest, not ingle human being will be alive who could understand such a conversatios we are having now?'
'Except----' began Winston doubtfully, and he stopped.
It had been on the tip of his tongue to say 'Except the proles,' but hhecked himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not iome way unorthodox. Syme, however, had divined what he was about to say.
'The proles are not human beings,' he said carelessly. 'By 2050--earlierrobably--all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared. The wholiterature of the past will have been destroyed. Chaucer, Shakespeareilton, Byron--they'll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changento something different, but actually changed into something contradictorf what they used to be. Even the literature of the Party will changeven the slogans will change. How could you have a slogan like "freedom ilavery" when the concept of freedom has been abolished? The whole climatf thought will be different. In fact there will be no thought, as wnderstand it now. Orthodoxy means not thinking--not needing to thinkrthodoxy is unconsciousness.'
One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep conviction, Syme wile vaporized. He is too intelligent. He sees too clearly and speaks tolainly. The Party does not like such people. One day he will disappeart is written in his face.
Winston had finished his bread and cheese. He turned a little sidewayn his chair to drink his mug of coffee. At the table on his left the maith the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away. A younoman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her baco Winston, was listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing witverything that he said. From time to time Winston caught some such remars 'I think you're so right, I do so agree with you', uttered in a youthfund rather silly feminine voice. But the other voice never stopped for anstant, even when the girl was speaking. Winston knew the man by sighthough he knew no more about him than that he held some important posn the Fiction Department. He was a man of about thirty, with a musculahroat and a large, mobile mouth. His head was thrown back a little, anecause of the angle at which he was sitting, his spectacles caught thight and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes. What walightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out ois mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word. Jusnce Winston caught a phrase--'complete and final elimination ooldsteinism'--jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all in one pieceike a line of type cast solid. For the rest it was just a noise, uack-quack-quacking. And yet, though you could not actually hear what than was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general naturee might be denouncing Goldstein and demanding sterner measures againshought-criminals and saboteurs, he might be fulminating against thtrocities of the Eurasian army, he might be praising Big Brother or theroes on the Malabar front--it made no difference. Whatever it was, yoould be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsocs he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up and downinston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being buome kind of dummy. It was not the man's brain that was speaking, it wais larynx. The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered inconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck.
Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the handle of his spoon waracing patterns in the puddle of stew. The voice from the other tabluacked rapidly on, easily audible in spite of the surrounding din.
'There is a word in Newspeak,' said Syme, 'I don't know whether you knot: DUCKSPEAK, to quack like a duck. It is one of those interesting wordhat have two contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it is abusepplied to someone you agree with, it is praise.'
Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again. He thought with a kind of sadness, although well knowing that Syme despised hind slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as hought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so. There was somethinubtly wrong with Syme. There was something that he lacked: discretionloofness, a sort of saving stupidity. You could not say that he wanorthodox. He believed in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Birother, he rejoiced over victories, he hated heretics, not merely witincerity but with a sort of restless zeal, an up-to-dateness onformation, which the ordinary Party member did not approach. Yet a fainir of disreputability always clung to him. He said things that would haveen better unsaid, he had read too many books, he frequented the Chestnuree Cafe, haunt of painters and musicians. There was no law, not even anwritten law, against frequenting the Chestnut Tree Cafe, yet the placas somehow ill-omened. The old, discredited leaders of the Party had beesed to gather there before they were finally purged. Goldstein himselft was said, had sometimes been seen there, years and decades ago. Syme'ate was not difficult to foresee. And yet it was a fact that if Symrasped, even for three seconds, the nature of his, Winston's, secrepinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police. So woulnybody else, for that matter: but Syme more than most. Zeal was nonough. Orthodoxy was unconsciousness.
Syme looked up. 'Here comes Parsons,' he said.
Something in the tone of his voice seemed to add, 'that bloody fool'arsons, Winston's fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threadinis way across the room--a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and roglike face. At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat aeck and waistline, but his movements were brisk and boyish. His wholppearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that althouge was wearing the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and reeckerchief of the Spies. In visualizing him one saw always a picture oimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms. Parsons didndeed, invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any othehysical activity gave him an excuse for doing so. He greeted them botith a cheery 'Hullo, hullo!' and sat down at the table, giving off antense smell of sweat. Beads of moisture stood out all over his pink faceis powers of sweating were extraordinary. At the Community Centre yoould always tell when he had been playing table-tennis by the dampness ohe bat handle. Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was ong column of words, and was studying it with an ink-pencil between hiingers.
'Look at him working away in the lunch hour,' said Parsons, nudgininston. 'Keenness, eh? What's that you've got there, old boy? Somethin bit too brainy for me, I expect. Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'hasing you. It's that sub you forgot to give me.'
'Which sub is that?' said Winston, automatically feeling for money. Abou quarter of one's salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptionshich were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of them.
'For Hate Week. You know--the house-by-house fund. I'm treasurer for oulock. We're making an all-out effort--going to put on a tremendous show tell you, it won't be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn't have thiggest outfit of flags in the whole street. Two dollars you promised me.'
Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsonntered in a small notebook, in the neat handwriting of the illiterate.
'By the way, old boy,' he said. 'I hear that little beggar of mine let flt you with his catapult yesterday. I gave him a good dressing-down for itn fact I told him I'd take the catapult away if he does it again.'
'I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,' saiinston.
'Ah, well--what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn't itischievous little beggars they are, both of them, but talk about keennessll they think about is the Spies, and the war, of course. D'you know whahat little girl of mine did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hikut Berkhamsted way? She got two other girls to go with her, slipped ofrom the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man. Theept on his tail for two hours, right through the woods, and then, whehey got into Amersham, handed him over to the patrols.'
'What did they do that for?' said Winston, somewhat taken aback. Parsonent on triumphantly:
'My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent--might have been droppey parachute, for instance. But here's the point, old boy. What do yohink put her on to him in the first place? She spotted he was wearing unny kind of shoes--said she'd never seen anyone wearing shoes like thaefore. So the chances were he was a foreigner. Pretty smart for a nippef seven, eh?'
'What happened to the man?' said Winston.
'Ah, that I couldn't say, of course. But I wouldn't be altogether surprisef----' Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tonguor the explosion.
'Good,' said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper.
'Of course we can't afford to take chances,' agreed Winston dutifully.
'What I mean to say, there is a war on,' said Parsons.
As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call floated from thelescreen just above their heads. However, it was not the proclamation o military victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministrf Plenty.
'Comrades!' cried an eager youthful voice. 'Attention, comrades! We havlorious news for you. We have won the battle for production! Returns noompleted of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that thtandard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the pasear. All over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneouemonstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices anaraded through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Birother for the new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowepon us. Here are some of the completed figures. Foodstuffs----'
The phrase 'our new, happy life' recurred several times. It had been avourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty. Parsons, his attentioaught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity sort of edified boredom. He could not follow the figures, but he waware that they were in some way a cause for satisfaction. He had luggeut a huge and filthy pipe which was already half full of charred tobaccoith the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible till a pipe to the top. Winston was smoking a Victory Cigarette which held carefully horizontal. The new ration did not start till tomorrow ane had only four cigarettes left. For the moment he had shut his ears the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of thelescreen. It appeared that there had even been demonstrations to thanig Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty grammes a week. Annly yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that the ration wao be REDUCED to twenty grammes a week. Was it possible that they coulwallow that, after only twenty-four hours? Yes, they swallowed it. Parsonwallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal. The eyeless creaturt the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a furiouesire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest thaast week the ration had been thirty grammes. Syme, too--in some moromplex way, involving doublethink, Syme swallowed it. Was he, then, ALONn the possession of a memory?
The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen. Aompared with last year there was more food, more clothes, more housesore furniture, more cooking-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicoptersore books, more babies--more of everything except disease, crime, annsanity. Year by year and minute by minute, everybody and everything wahizzing rapidly upwards. As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken uis spoon and was dabbling in the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled acroshe table, drawing a long streak of it out into a pattern. He meditateesentfully on the physical texture of life. Had it always been likhis? Had food always tasted like this? He looked round the canteen low-ceilinged, crowded room, its walls grimy from the contact onnumerable bodies; battered metal tables and chairs, placed so closogether that you sat with elbows touching; bent spoons, dented traysoarse white mugs; all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack; and ourish, composite smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew anirty clothes. Always in your stomach and in your skin there was a sorf protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you ha right to. It was true that he had no memories of anything greatlifferent. In any time that he could accurately remember, there had neveeen quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes thaere not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and ricketyooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to piecesread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tasting, cigarettensufficient--nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin. And thoughf course, it grew worse as one's body aged, was it not a sign that thias NOT the natural order of things, if one's heart sickened at thiscomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickinesf one's socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the grittoap, the cigarettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange eviastes? Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kinf ancestral memory that things had once been different?
He looked round the canteen again. Nearly everyone was ugly, and woultill have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform bluveralls. On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a smalluriously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyearting suspicious glances from side to side. How easy it was, thoughinston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical typet up by the Party as an ideal--tall muscular youths and deep-bosomeaidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree--existed and everedominated. Actually, so far as he could judge, the majority of peopln Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured. It was curious how thaeetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growintout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, anat inscrutable faces with very small eyes. It was the type that seemed tlourish best under the dominion of the Party.
The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended on another trumpet calnd gave way to tinny music. Parsons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by thombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth.
'The Ministry of Plenty's certainly done a good job this year,' he saiith a knowing shake of his head. 'By the way, Smith old boy, I supposou haven't got any razor blades you can let me have?'
'Not one,' said Winston. 'I've been using the same blade for six weekyself.'
'Ah, well--just thought I'd ask you, old boy.'
'Sorry,' said Winston.
The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during thinistry's announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever. For someason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with heispy hair and the dust in the creases of her face. Within two years thoshildren would be denouncing her to the Thought Police. Mrs Parsons woule vaporized. Syme would be vaporized. Winston would be vaporized. O'Brieould be vaporized. Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporizedhe eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be vaporizedhe little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthinorridors of Ministries they, too, would never be vaporized. And the girith dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department--she would never baporized either. It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who woulurvive and who would perish: though just what it was that made fourvival, it was not easy to say.
At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk. Thirl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him. Ias the girl with dark hair. She was looking at him in a sidelong way, buith curious intensity. The instant she caught his eye she looked awagain.
The sweat started out on Winston's backbone. A horrible pang of terroent through him. It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagginneasiness behind. Why was she watching him? Why did she keep following hibout? Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been ahe table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards. But yesterday, any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately behind hihen there was no apparent need to do so. Quite likely her real object haeen to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough.
His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actually a membef the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who wahe greatest danger of all. He did not know how long she had been lookint him, but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possiblhat his features had not been perfectly under control. It was terriblangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public placr within range of a telescreen. The smallest thing could give you away nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering tourself--anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, oaving something to hide. In any case, to wear an improper expression oour face (to look incredulous when a victory was announced, for exampleas itself a punishable offence. There was even a word for it in NewspeakACECRIME, it was called.
The girl had turned her back on him again. Perhaps after all she was noeally following him about, perhaps it was coincidence that she had sat slose to him two days running. His cigarette had gone out, and he laid iarefully on the edge of the table. He would finish smoking it after workf he could keep the tobacco in it. Quite likely the person at the nexable was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in thellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette enust not be wasted. Syme had folded up his strip of paper and stowed iway in his pocket. Parsons had begun talking again.
'Did I ever tell you, old boy,' he said, chuckling round the stem of hiipe, 'about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the olarket-woman's skirt because they saw her wrapping up sausages in a postef B.B.? Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matchesurned her quite badly, I believe. Little beggars, eh? But keen as mustardhat's a first-rate training they give them in the Spies nowadays--bettehan in my day, even. What d'you think's the latest thing they've servehem out with? Ear trumpets for listening through keyholes! My littlirl brought one home the other night--tried it out on our sitting-roooor, and reckoned she could hear twice as much as with her ear to thole. Of course it's only a toy, mind you. Still, gives 'em the righdea, eh?'
At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle. It was thignal to return to work. All three men sprang to their feet to join ihe struggle round the lifts, and the remaining tobacco fell out oinston's cigarette.
Chapter 6
Winston was writing in his diary:
   It was three years ago. It was on a dark evening, in a narroide-street near one of the big railway stations. She was standing near oorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light. Shad a young face, painted very thick. It was really the paint that appealeo me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips. Partomen never paint their faces. There was nobody else in the street, and nelescreens. She said two dollars. I----
For the moment it was too difficult to go on. He shut his eyes and presseis fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kepecurring. He had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string oilthy words at the top of his voice. Or to bang his head against the wallo kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window--to do aniolent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that waormenting him.
Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system. At any momenhe tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visiblymptom. He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weekack; a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thirty-five torty, tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case. They were a few metrepart when the left side of the man's face was suddenly contorted by a sorf spasm. It happened again just as they were passing one another: it wanly a twitch, a quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, bubviously habitual. He remembered thinking at the time: That poor devil ione for. And what was frightening was that the action was quite possiblnconscious. The most deadly danger of all was talking in your sleep. Theras no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see.
He drew his breath and went on writing:
   I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into asement kitchen. There was a bed against the wall, and a lamp on thable, turned down very low. She----
His teeth were set on edge. He would have liked to spit. Simultaneouslith the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wifeinston was married--had been married, at any rate: probably he still waarried, so far as he knew his wife was not dead. He seemed to breathgain the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitchen, an odour compoundef bugs and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheleslluring, because no woman of the Party ever used scent, or could bmagined as doing so. Only the proles used scent. In his mind the smelf it was inextricably mixed up with fornication.
When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two yearr thereabouts. Consorting with prostitutes was forbidden, of course, but was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself treak. It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter. To baught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced-labour campot more, if you had committed no other offence. And it was easy enoughrovided that you could avoid being caught in the act. The poorer quarterwarmed with women who were ready to sell themselves. Some could even burchased for a bottle of gin, which the proles were not supposed to drinkacitly the Party was even inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outleor instincts which could not be altogether suppressed. Mere debaucherid not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and onlnvolved the women of a submerged and despised class. The unforgivablrime was promiscuity between Party members. But--though this was onf the crimes that the accused in the great purges invariably confesseo--it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually happening.
The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forminoyalties which it might not be able to control. Its real, undeclareurpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act. Not love so mucs eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it. Alarriages between Party members had to be approved by a committeppointed for the purpose, and--though the principle was never clearltated--permission was always refused if the couple concerned gavhe impression of being physically attracted to one another. The onlecognized purpose of marriage was to beget children for the service ohe Party. Sexual intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgustininor operation, like having an enema. This again was never put into plaiords, but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every Party member frohildhood onwards. There were even organizations such as the Junionti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes. Alhildren were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it waalled in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions. This, Winstoas aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted iith the general ideology of the Party. The Party was trying to kill thex instinct, or, if it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirtt. He did not know why this was so, but it seemed natural that it shoule so. And as far as the women were concerned, the Party's efforts werargely successful.
He thought again of Katharine. It must be nine, ten--nearly eleven yearince they had parted. It was curious how seldom he thought of her. Foays at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been marriedhey had only been together for about fifteen months. The Party did noermit divorce, but it rather encouraged separation in cases where therere no children.
Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splendiovements. She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have calleoble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothinehind it. Very early in her married life he had decided--though perhapt was only that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people--thahe had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he haver encountered. She had not a thought in her head that was not a slogannd there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable owallowing if the Party handed it out to her. 'The human sound-track' hicknamed her in his own mind. Yet he could have endured living with hef it had not been for just one thing--sex.
As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen. To embrace heas like embracing a jointed wooden image. And what was strange was thaven when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that shas simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength. The rigiditf her muscles managed to convey that impression. She would lie therith shut eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but SUBMITTING. It waxtraordinarily embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible. But even thee could have borne living with her if it had been agreed that they shoulemain celibate. But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused thishey must, she said, produce a child if they could. So the performancontinued to happen, once a week quite regularly, whenever it was nompossible. She even used to remind him of it in the morning, as somethinhich had to be done that evening and which must not be forgotten. She hawo names for it. One was 'making a baby', and the other was 'our duty the Party' (yes, she had actually used that phrase). Quite soon he grew tave a feeling of positive dread when the appointed day came round. Buuckily no child appeared, and in the end she agreed to give up tryingnd soon afterwards they parted.
Winston sighed inaudibly. He picked up his pen again anrote:
   She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind oreliminary in the most coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled uer skirt. I----
He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugnd cheap scent in his nostrils, and in his heart a feeling of defeat anesentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought oatharine's white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Partyhy did it always have to be like this? Why could he not have a woman ois own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years? But a reaove affair was an almost unthinkable event. The women of the Party werll alike. Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loyalty. Bareful early conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish thaas dinned into them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, bectures, parades, songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feelinad been driven out of them. His reason told him that there must bxceptions, but his heart did not believe it. They were all impregnables the Party intended that they should be. And what he wanted, more evehan to be loved, was to break down that wall of virtue, even if it wernly once in his whole life. The sexual act, successfully performed, waebellion. Desire was thoughtcrime. Even to have awakened Katharine, if hould have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although she wais wife.
But the rest of the story had got to be written down. He wrote:
   I turned up the lamp. When I saw her in the light----
After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed verright. For the first time he could see the woman properly. He had taken tep towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror. He was painfullonscious of the risk he had taken in coming here. It was perfectlossible that the patrols would catch him on the way out: for that mattehey might be waiting outside the door at this moment. If he went awaithout even doing what he had come here to do----!
It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed. What he hauddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was OLD. The paint walastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might cracike a cardboard mask. There were streaks of white in her hair; but thruly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little openevealing nothing except a cavernous blackness. She had no teeth at all.
He wrote hurriedly, in scrabbling handwriting:
   When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty years olt least. But I went ahead and did it just the same.
He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again. He had written it dowt last, but it made no difference. The therapy had not worked. The urgo shout filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever.
Chapter 7
'If there is hope,' wrote Winston, 'it lies in the proles.'
If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because only there in thoswarming disregarded masses, 85 per cent of the population of Oceaniaould the force to destroy the Party ever be generated. The Party coulot be overthrown from within. Its enemies, if it had any enemies, hao way of coming together or even of identifying one another. Even ihe legendary Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it wanconceivable that its members could ever assemble in larger numbers thawos and threes. Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of thoice, at the most, an occasional whispered word. But the proles, if onlhey could somehow become conscious of their own strength. would have need to conspire. They needed only to rise up and shake themselves lik horse shaking off flies. If they chose they could blow the Party tieces tomorrow morning. Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to it? And yet----!
He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when remendous shout of hundreds of voices women's voices--had burst from ide-street a little way ahead. It was a great formidable cry of angend despair, a deep, loud 'Oh-o-o-o-oh!' that went humming on like theverberation of a bell. His heart had leapt. It's started! he had thought riot! The proles are breaking loose at last! When he had reached the spot was to see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stallf a street market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomeassengers on a sinking ship. But at this moment the general despair brokown into a multitude of individual quarrels. It appeared that one of thtalls had been selling tin saucepans. They were wretched, flimsy thingsut cooking-pots of any kind were always difficult to get. Now the supplad unexpectedly given out. The successful women, bumped and jostled bhe rest, were trying to make off with their saucepans while dozens others clamoured round the stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritisnd of having more saucepans somewhere in reserve. There was a fresutburst of yells. Two bloated women, one of them with her hair cominown, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear it out one another's hands. For a moment they were both tugging, and then thandle came off. Winston watched them disgustedly. And yet, just for oment, what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from onl few hundred throats! Why was it that they could never shout like thabout anything that mattered?
He wrote:
   Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after theave rebelled they cannot become conscious.
That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of tharty textbooks. The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the prolerom bondage. Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed bhe capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forceo work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as atter of fact), children had been sold into the factories at the agf six. But simultaneously, true to the Principles of doublethink, tharty taught that the proles were natural inferiors who must be kept iubjection, like animals, by the application of a few simple rules. Ieality very little was known about the proles. It was not necessary tnow much. So long as they continued to work and breed, their othectivities were without importance. Left to themselves, like cattle turneoose upon the plains of Argentina, they had reverted to a style of lifhat appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern. They werorn, they grew up in the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they passehrough a brief blossoming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they marriet twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died, for the most partt sixty. Heavy physical work, the care of home and children, pettuarrels with neighbours, films, football, beer, and above all, gamblingilled up the horizon of their minds. To keep them in control was noifficult. A few agents of the Thought Police moved always among thempreading false rumours and marking down and eliminating the fendividuals who were judged capable of becoming dangerous; but no attempas made to indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party. It was noesirable that the proles should have strong political feelings. All thaas required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed thenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours ohorter rations. And even when they became discontented, as they sometimeid, their discontent led nowhere, because being without general ideashey could only focus it on petty specific grievances. The larger evilnvariably escaped their notice. The great majority of proles did not eveave telescreens in their homes. Even the civil police interfered with theery little. There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a wholorld-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, prostitutes, drug-peddlers, anacketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the prolehemselves, it was of no importance. In all questions of morals they werllowed to follow their ancestral code. The sexual puritanism of tharty was not imposed upon them. Promiscuity went unpunished, divorcas permitted. For that matter, even religious worship would have beeermitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or wanting ithey were beneath suspicion. As the Party slogan put it: 'Proles annimals are free.'
Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer. Iad begun itching again. The thing you invariably came back to was thmpossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really beeike. He took out of the drawer a copy of a children's history textboohich he had borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copying a passage inthe diary:
   In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London waot the beautiful city that we know today. It was a dark, dirty, miserabllace where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds anhousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof tleep under. Children no older than you had to work twelve hours a day foruel masters who flogged them with whips if they worked too slowly aned them on nothing but stale breadcrusts and water. But in among alhis terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful househat were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to loofter them. These rich men were called capitalists. They were fat, uglen with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite pageou can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called rock coat, and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which waalled a top hat. This was the uniform of the capitalists, and no one elsas allowed to wear it. The capitalists owned everything in the world, anveryone else was their slave. They owned all the land, all the housesll the factories, and all the money. If anyone disobeyed them they coulhrow them into prison, or they could take his job away and starve him teath. When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to cringe anow to him, and take off his cap and address him as 'Sir'. The chief oll the capitalists was called the King, and----
But he knew the rest of the catalogue. There would be mention of thishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, thillory, the stocks, the treadmill, the cat-o'-nine tails, the Lord Mayor'anquet, and the practice of kissing the Pope's toe. There was alsomething called the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, which would probably not bentioned in a textbook for children. It was the law by which everapitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of hiactories.
How could you tell how much of it was lies? It MIGHT be true that thverage human being was better off now than he had been before thevolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in youwn bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in werntolerable and that at some other time they must have been different. Itruck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was nots cruelty and insecurity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, itistlessness. Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not onlo the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the idealhat the Party was trying to achieve. Great areas of it, even for a Partember, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging through drearobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadgin saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end. The ideal set up by tharty was something huge, terrible, and glittering--a world of steend concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons--a nation oarriors and fanatics, marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking thame thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fightingriumphing, persecuting--three hundred million people all with the samace. The reality was decaying, dingy cities where underfed people shuffleo and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up nineteenth-century houses thamelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories. He seemed to see a vision oondon, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins, and mixed up with ias a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and wispy hairiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe.
He reached down and scratched his ankle again. Day and night thelescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people todaad more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations--that theived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, strongerappier, more intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty yeargo. Not a word of it could ever be proved or disproved. The Party claimedor example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: beforhe Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent. Tharty claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 pehousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300--and so it wenn. It was like a single equation with two unknowns. It might very well bhat literally every word in the history books, even the things that onccepted without question, was pure fantasy. For all he knew there mighever have been any such law as the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, or any such creaturs a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat.
Everything faded into mist. The past was erased, the erasure was forgottenhe lie became truth. Just once in his life he had possessed--AFTER thvent: that was what counted--concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act oalsification. He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirteconds. In 1973, it must have been--at any rate, it was at about the timhen he and Katharine had parted. But the really relevant date was sever eight years earlier.
The story really began in the middle sixties, the period of the greaurges in which the original leaders of the Revolution were wiped ounce and for all. By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brotheimself. All the rest had by that time been exposed as traitors anounter-revolutionaries. Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knehere, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majoritad been executed after spectacular public trials at which they madonfession of their crimes. Among the last survivors were three men nameones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. It must have been in 1965 that these thread been arrested. As often happened, they had vanished for a year or moreo that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, and then hauddenly been brought forth to incriminate themselves in the usual wayhey had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, thnemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of variourusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brothehich had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotagausing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. After confessing these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and giveosts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important. All thread written long, abject articles in 'The Times', analysing the reasonor their defection and promising to make amends.
Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of then the Chestnut Tree Cafe. He remembered the sort of terrified fascinatioith which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye. They were mear older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last greaigures left over from the heroic days of the Party. The glamour of thnderground struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them. He hahe feeling, though already at that time facts and dates were growinlurry, that he had known their names years earlier than he had known thaf Big Brother. But also they were outlaws, enemies, untouchables, doomeith absolute certainty to extinction within a year or two. No one who hance fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the endhey were corpses waiting to be sent back to the grave.
There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them. It was not wisven to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people. They were sittinn silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was thpeciality of the cafe. Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearancad most impressed Winston. Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturisthose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before anuring the Revolution. Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons werppearing in The Times. They were simply an imitation of his earlieanner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing. Always they were ehashing of the ancient themes--slum tenements, starving children, streeattles, capitalists in top hats--even on the barricades the capitalisttill seemed to cling to their top hats an endless, hopeless effort tet back into the past. He was a monstrous man, with a mane of greasrey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick negroid lips. At onime he must have been immensely strong; now his great body was saggingloping, bulging, falling away in every direction. He seemed to be breakinp before one's eyes, like a mountain crumbling.
It was the lonely hour of fifteen. Winston could not now remember how had come to be in the cafe at such a time. The place was almost empty. inny music was trickling from the telescreens. The three men sat in theiorner almost motionless, never speaking. Uncommanded, the waiter broughresh glasses of gin. There was a chessboard on the table beside them, withe pieces set out but no game started. And then, for perhaps half a minutn all, something happened to the telescreens. The tune that they werlaying changed, and the tone of the music changed too. There came intt--but it was something hard to describe. It was a peculiar, crackedraying, jeering note: in his mind Winston called it a yellow note. Anhen a voice from the telescreen was singing:
  Under the spreading chestnut tre I sold you and you sold me There lie they, and here lie w Under the spreading chestnut tree.
The three men never stirred. But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford'uinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears. And for the firsime he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowinT WHAT he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had broken noses.
A little later all three were re-arrested. It appeared that they hangaged in fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release. Aheir second trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again, wit whole string of new ones. They were executed, and their fate was recorden the Party histories, a warning to posterity. About five years aftehis, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of documents which had juslopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his desk when he came on a fragmenf paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and theorgotten. The instant he had flattened it out he saw its significancet was a half-page torn out of 'The Times' of about ten years earlier--thop half of the page, so that it included the date--and it contained hotograph of the delegates at some Party function in New York. Prominenn the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. There wao mistaking them, in any case their names were in the caption at thottom.
The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on thaate they had been on Eurasian soil. They had flown from a secret airfieln Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred witembers of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed importanilitary secrets. The date had stuck in Winston's memory because it chanceo be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countlesther places as well. There was only one possible conclusion: thonfessions were lies.
Of course, this was not in itself a discovery. Even at that time Winstoad not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges hactually committed the crimes that they were accused of. But this waoncrete evidence; it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossione which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theoryt was enough to blow the Party to atoms, if in some way it could haveen published to the world and its significance made known.
He had gone straight on working. As soon as he saw what the photograpas, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paperuckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point oiew of the telescreen.
He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so ao get as far away from the telescreen as possible. To keep your facxpressionless was not difficult, and even your breathing could bontrolled, with an effort: but you could not control the beating of youeart, and the telescreen was quite delicate enough to pick it up. He lehat he judged to be ten minutes go by, tormented all the while by thear that some accident--a sudden draught blowing across his desk, fonstance--would betray him. Then, without uncovering it again, he droppehe photograph into the memory hole, along with some other waste papersithin another minute, perhaps, it would have crumbled into ashes.
That was ten--eleven years ago. Today, probably, he would have kept thahotograph. It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingereemed to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itselfs well as the event it recorded, was only memory. Was the Party's holpon the past less strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence whicxisted no longer HAD ONCE existed?
But today, supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its asheshe photograph might not even be evidence. Already, at the time when hade his discovery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it musave been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayeheir country. Since then there had been other changes--two, threee could not remember how many. Very likely the confessions had beeewritten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longead the smallest significance. The past not only changed, but changeontinuously. What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was thae had never clearly understood why the huge imposture was undertakenhe immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but thltimate motive was mysterious. He took up his pen again and wrote:
   I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY.
He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself wa lunatic. Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one. At one time iad been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sunoday, to believe that the past is unalterable. He might be ALONE iolding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic. But the thought of bein lunatic did not greatly trouble him: the horror was that he might alse wrong.
He picked up the children's history book and looked at the portrait oig Brother which formed its frontispiece. The hypnotic eyes gazed intis own. It was as though some huge force were pressing down upoou--something that penetrated inside your skull, battering against yourain, frightening you out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, teny the evidence of your senses. In the end the Party would announce thawo and two made five, and you would have to believe it. It was inevitablhat they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of theiosition demanded it. Not merely the validity of experience, but the verxistence of external reality, was tacitly denied by their philosophy. Theresy of heresies was common sense. And what was terrifying was not thahey would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be rightor, after all, how do we know that two and two make four? Or that thorce of gravity works? Or that the past is unchangeable? If both the pasnd the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself iontrollable what then?
But no! His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord. The facf O'Brien, not called up by any obvious association, had floated into hiind. He knew, with more certainty than before, that O'Brien was on hiide. He was writing the diary for O'Brien--TO O'Brien: it was like anterminable letter which no one would ever read, but which was addresseo a particular person and took its colour from that fact.
The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears. It waheir final, most essential command. His heart sank as he thought ohe enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Partntellectual would overthrow him in debate, the subtle arguments which hould not be able to understand, much less answer. And yet he was in thight! They were wrong and he was right. The obvious, the silly, and thrue had got to be defended. Truisms are true, hold on to that! The soliorld exists, its laws do not change. Stones are hard, water is wetbjects unsupported fall towards the earth's centre. With the feeling thae was speaking to O'Brien, and also that he was setting forth an importanxiom, he wrote:
   Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four. If that iranted, all else follows.
Chapter 8
From somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roastinoffee--real coffee, not Victory Coffee--came floating out into the streetinston paused involuntarily. For perhaps two seconds he was back in thalf-forgotten world of his childhood. Then a door banged, seeming to cuff the smell as abruptly as though it had been a sound.
He had walked several kilometres over pavements, and his varicose ulceas throbbing. This was the second time in three weeks that he had missen evening at the Community Centre: a rash act, since you could be certaihat the number of your attendances at the Centre was carefully checkedn principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone excepn bed. It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleepine would be taking part in some kind of communal recreation: to do anythinhat suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourselfas always slightly dangerous. There was a word for it in NewspeakWNLIFE, it was called, meaning individualism and eccentricity. But thivening as he came out of the Ministry the balminess of the April air haempted him. The sky was a warmer blue than he had seen it that year, anuddenly the long, noisy evening at the Centre, the boring, exhaustinames, the lectures, the creaking camaraderie oiled by gin, had seementolerable. On impulse he had turned away from the bus-stop and wandereff into the labyrinth of London, first south, then east, then north againosing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering in whicirection he was going.
'If there is hope,' he had written in the diary, 'it lies in the proles.he words kept coming back to him, statement of a mystical truth and alpable absurdity. He was somewhere in the vague, brown-coloured slumo the north and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station. He waalking up a cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battereoorways which gave straight on the pavement and which were somehouriously suggestive of ratholes. There were puddles of filthy water hernd there among the cobbles. In and out of the dark doorways, and dowarrow alley-ways that branched off on either side, people swarmed istonishing numbers--girls in full bloom, with crudely lipsticked mouthsnd youths who chased the girls, and swollen waddling women who showed yohat the girls would be like in ten years' time, and old bent creaturehuffling along on splayed feet, and ragged barefooted children who playen the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their motherserhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded upost of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few eyed him with ort of guarded curiosity. Two monstrous women with brick-red forearmolded across their aprons were talking outside a doorway. Winston caughcraps of conversation as he approached.
'"Yes," I says to 'er, "that's all very well," I says. "But if you'd oeen in my place you'd of done the same as what I done. It's easy triticize," I says, "but you ain't got the same problems as what I got."'
'Ah,' said the other, 'that's jest it. That's jest where it is.'
The strident voices stopped abruptly. The women studied him in hostililence as he went past. But it was not hostility, exactly; merely a kinf wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the passing of some unfamilianimal. The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in treet like this. Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unlesou had definite business there. The patrols might stop you if you happeneo run into them. 'May I see your papers, comrade? What are you doing herehat time did you leave work? Is this your usual way home?'--and so on ano forth. Not that there was any rule against walking home by an unusuaoute: but it was enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Policeard about it.
Suddenly the whole street was in commotion. There were yells of warninrom all sides. People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits. oung woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up iny child playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt bacgain, all in one movement. At the same instant a man in a concertina-liklack suit, who had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winstonointing excitedly to the sky.
'Steamer!' he yelled. 'Look out, guv'nor! Bang over'ead! Lay down quick!'
'Steamer' was a nickname which, for some reason, the proles applied tocket bombs. Winston promptly flung himself on his face. The proles werearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind. They seemeo possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advanchen a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled fastehan sound. Winston clasped his forearms above his head. There was a roahat seemed to make the pavement heave; a shower of light objects patteren to his back. When he stood up he found that he was covered witragments of glass from the nearest window.
He walked on. The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up thtreet. A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud olaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins. Theras a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and ihe middle of it he could see a bright red streak. When he got up to it haw that it was a human hand severed at the wrist. Apart from the bloodtump, the hand was so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast.
He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turneown a side-street to the right. Within three or four minutes he was ouf the area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life ohe streets was going on as though nothing had happened. It was nearlwenty hours, and the drinking-shops which the proles frequented ('pubs'hey called them) were choked with customers. From their grimy swing doorsndlessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, sawdustnd sour beer. In an angle formed by a projecting house-front three meere standing very close together, the middle one of them holding olded-up newspaper which the other two were studying over his shoulderven before he was near enough to make out the expression on their facesinston could see absorption in every line of their bodies. It wabviously some serious piece of news that they were reading. He was a feaces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of the meere in violent altercation. For a moment they seemed almost on the poinf blows.
'Can't you bleeding well listen to what I say? I tell you no number endinn seven ain't won for over fourteen months!'
'Yes, it 'as, then!'
'No, it 'as not! Back 'ome I got the 'ole lot of 'em for over two yearrote down on a piece of paper. I takes 'em down reg'lar as the clock. An tell you, no number ending in seven----'
'Yes, a seven 'AS won! I could pretty near tell you the bleeding numberour oh seven, it ended in. It were in February--second week in February.'
'February your grandmother! I got it all down in black and white. An' ell you, no number----'
'Oh, pack it in!' said the third man.
They were talking about the Lottery. Winston looked back when he had gonhirty metres. They were still arguing, with vivid, passionate faceshe Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one publivent to which the proles paid serious attention. It was probable thahere were some millions of proles for whom the Lottery was the principaf not the only reason for remaining alive. It was their delight, theiolly, their anodyne, their intellectual stimulant. Where the Lottery waoncerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capable ontricate calculations and staggering feats of memory. There was a wholribe of men who made a living simply by selling systems, forecasts, anucky amulets. Winston had nothing to do with the running of the Lotteryhich was managed by the Ministry of Plenty, but he was aware (indeeveryone in the party was aware) that the prizes were largely imaginarynly small sums were actually paid out, the winners of the big prizes beinon-existent persons. In the absence of any real intercommunication betweene part of Oceania and another, this was not difficult to arrange.
But if there was hope, it lay in the proles. You had to cling on to thathen you put it in words it sounded reasonable: it was when you looked ahe human beings passing you on the pavement that it became an act oaith. The street into which he had turned ran downhill. He had a feelinhat he had been in this neighbourhood before, and that there was a maihoroughfare not far away. From somewhere ahead there came a din ohouting voices. The street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flighf steps which led down into a sunken alley where a few stall-keeperere selling tired-looking vegetables. At this moment Winston rememberehere he was. The alley led out into the main street, and down the nexurning, not five minutes away, was the junk-shop where he had bought thlank book which was now his diary. And in a small stationer's shop noar away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink.
He paused for a moment at the top of the steps. On the opposite side ohe alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frostever but in reality were merely coated with dust. A very old man, bent buctive, with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawnushed open the swing door and went in. As Winston stood watching, iccurred to him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, halready been middle-aged when the Revolution happened. He and a few otherike him were the last links that now existed with the vanished world oapitalism. In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideaad been formed before the Revolution. The older generation had mostleen wiped out in the great purges of the fifties and sixties, and the feho survived had long ago been terrified into complete intellectuaurrender. If there was any one still alive who could give you a truthfuccount of conditions in the early part of the century, it could only be role. Suddenly the passage from the history book that he had copied intis diary came back into Winston's mind, and a lunatic impulse took holf him. He would go into the pub, he would scrape acquaintance with thald man and question him. He would say to him: 'Tell me about your lifhen you were a boy. What was it like in those days? Were things bettehan they are now, or were they worse?'
Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended thteps and crossed the narrow street. It was madness of course. As usualhere was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting theiubs, but it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed. If thatrols appeared he might plead an attack of faintness, but it was noikely that they would believe him. He pushed open the door, and a hideouheesy smell of sour beer hit him in the face. As he entered the din ooices dropped to about half its volume. Behind his back he could feeveryone eyeing his blue overalls. A game of darts which was going on ahe other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps as much as thirteconds. The old man whom he had followed was standing at the bar, havinome kind of altercation with the barman, a large, stout, hook-nosed younan with enormous forearms. A knot of others, standing round with glassen their hands, were watching the scene.
'I arst you civil enough, didn't I?' said the old man, straightening hihoulders pugnaciously. 'You telling me you ain't got a pint mug in thole bleeding boozer?'
'And what in hell's name IS a pint?' said the barman, leaning forward withe tips of his fingers on the counter.
''Ark at 'im! Calls 'isself a barman and don't know what a pint is! Why pint's the 'alf of a quart, and there's four quarts to the gallonAve to teach you the A, B, C next.'
'Never heard of 'em,' said the barman shortly. 'Litre and halitre--that's all we serve. There's the glasses on the shelf in fronf you.'
'I likes a pint,' persisted the old man. 'You could 'a drawed me off a pinasy enough. We didn't 'ave these bleeding litres when I was a young man.'
'When you were a young man we were all living in the treetops,' said tharman, with a glance at the other customers.
There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston's entreemed to disappear. The old man's white-stubbled face had flushed pink. Hurned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Winston. Winston caughim gently by the arm.
'May I offer you a drink?' he said.
'You're a gent,' said the other, straightening his shoulders again. Hppeared not to have noticed Winston's blue overalls. 'Pint!' he addeggressively to the barman. 'Pint of wallop.'
The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glassehich he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter. Beer was the only drinou could get in prole pubs. The proles were supposed not to drink ginhough in practice they could get hold of it easily enough. The game oarts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begualking about lottery tickets. Winston's presence was forgotten for oment. There was a deal table under the window where he and the old maould talk without fear of being overheard. It was horribly dangerous, but any rate there was no telescreen in the room, a point he had made surf as soon as he came in.
''E could 'a drawed me off a pint,' grumbled the old man as he settled dowehind a glass. 'A 'alf litre ain't enough. It don't satisfy. And a 'olitre's too much. It starts my bladder running. Let alone the price.'
'You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,' saiinston tentatively.
The old man's pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar, anrom the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-roohat he expected the changes to have occurred.
'The beer was better,' he said finally. 'And cheaper! When I was a younan, mild beer--wallop we used to call it--was fourpence a pint. That waefore the war, of course.'
'Which war was that?' said Winston.
'It's all wars,' said the old man vaguely. He took up his glass, and hihoulders straightened again. ''Ere's wishing you the very best of 'ealth!'
In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam's apple made a surprisingly rapip-and-down movement, and the beer vanished. Winston went to the bar aname back with two more half-litres. The old man appeared to have forgotteis prejudice against drinking a full litre.
'You are very much older than I am,' said Winston. 'You must have been rown man before I was born. You can remember what it was like in the olays, before the Revolution. People of my age don't really know anythinbout those times. We can only read about them in books, and what it sayn the books may not be true. I should like your opinion on that. Thistory books say that life before the Revolution was completely differenrom what it is now. There was the most terrible oppression, injusticeoverty worse than anything we can imagine. Here in London, the great masf the people never had enough to eat from birth to death. Half of theadn't even boots on their feet. They worked twelve hours a day, they lefchool at nine, they slept ten in a room. And at the same time there wer very few people, only a few thousands--the capitalists, they weralled--who were rich and powerful. They owned everything that there wao own. They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, theode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank champagnehey wore top hats----'
The old man brightened suddenly.
'Top 'ats!' he said. 'Funny you should mention 'em. The same thing comnto my 'ead only yesterday, I dono why. I was jest thinking, I ain't see top 'at in years. Gorn right out, they 'ave. The last time I wore onas at my sister-in-law's funeral. And that was--well, I couldn't give yohe date, but it must'a been fifty years ago. Of course it was only 'ireor the occasion, you understand.'
'It isn't very important about the top hats,' said Winston patientlyThe point is, these capitalists--they and a few lawyers and priests ano forth who lived on them--were the lords of the earth. Everything existeor their benefit. You--the ordinary people, the workers--were theilaves. They could do what they liked with you. They could ship you off tanada like cattle. They could sleep with your daughters if they chosehey could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o'-ninails. You had to take your cap off when you passed them. Every capitalisent about with a gang of lackeys who----'
The old man brightened again.
'Lackeys!' he said. 'Now there's a word I ain't 'eard since ever so longackeys! That reg'lar takes me back, that does. I recollect--oh, donkey'ears ago--I used to sometimes go to 'Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon tear the blokes making speeches. Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jewsndians--all sorts there was. And there was one bloke--well, I couldn'ive you 'is name, but a real powerful speaker 'e was. 'E didn't 'alive it 'em! "Lackeys!" 'e says, "lackeys of the bourgeoisie! Flunkies ohe ruling class!" Parasites--that was another of them. And 'yenas--'efinitely called 'em 'yenas. Of course 'e was referring to the Labouarty, you understand.'
Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-purposes.
'What I really wanted to know was this,' he said. 'Do you feel that yoave more freedom now than you had in those days? Are you treated morike a human being? In the old days, the rich people, the people at thop----'
'The 'Ouse of Lords,' put in the old man reminiscently.
'The House of Lords, if you like. What I am asking is, were these peoplble to treat you as an inferior, simply because they were rich and yoere poor? Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them "Sir" anake off your cap when you passed them?'
The old man appeared to think deeply. He drank off about a quarter of hieer before answering.
'Yes,' he said. 'They liked you to touch your cap to 'em. It showeespect, like. I didn't agree with it, myself, but I done it often enoughad to, as you might say.'
'And was it usual--I'm only quoting what I've read in history books--wat usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavemennto the gutter?'
'One of 'em pushed me once,' said the old man. 'I recollect it as if ias yesterday. It was Boat Race night--terribly rowdy they used to get ooat Race night--and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenueuite a gent, 'e was--dress shirt, top 'at, black overcoat. 'E was kinf zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into 'im accidental-likeE says, "Why can't you look where you're going?" 'e says. I say, "Ju thinou've bought the bleeding pavement?" 'E says, "I'll twist your bloody 'eaff if you get fresh with me." I says, "You're drunk. I'll give you iharge in 'alf a minute," I says. An' if you'll believe me, 'e puts 'iand on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under thheels of a bus. Well, I was young in them days, and I was going to 'avetched 'im one, only----'
A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. The old man's memory waothing but a rubbish-heap of details. One could question him all daithout getting any real information. The party histories might still brue, after a fashion: they might even be completely true. He made a lasttempt.
'Perhaps I have not made myself clear,' he said. 'What I'm trying to sas this. You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your lifefore the Revolution. In 1925, for instance, you were already grown upould you say from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was bettehan it is now, or worse? If you could choose, would you prefer to livhen or now?'
The old man looked meditatively at the darts board. He finished up hieer, more slowly than before. When he spoke it was with a toleranhilosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him.
'I know what you expect me to say,' he said. 'You expect me to say as I'ooner be young again. Most people'd say they'd sooner be young, if yorst 'em. You got your 'ealth and strength when you're young. When yoet to my time of life you ain't never well. I suffer something wickerom my feet, and my bladder's jest terrible. Six and seven times a night 'as me out of bed. On the other 'and, there's great advantages in bein old man. You ain't got the same worries. No truck with women, and that' great thing. I ain't 'ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you'redit it. Nor wanted to, what's more.'
Winston sat back against the window-sill. It was no use going on. He wabout to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffleapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room. The extralf-litre was already working on him. Winston sat for a minute or twazing at his empty glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him ounto the street again. Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, thuge and simple question, 'Was life better before the Revolution than is now?' would have ceased once and for all to be answerable. But in effect was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from thncient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. Theemembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt fo lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister's face, thwirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevanacts were outside the range of their vision. They were like the anthich can see small objects but not large ones. And when memory failed anritten records were falsified--when that happened, the claim of the Parto have improved the conditions of human life had got to be acceptedecause there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standargainst which it could be tested.
At this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly. He halted and lookep. He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersemong dwelling-houses. Immediately above his head there hung threiscoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded. Heemed to know the place. Of course! He was standing outside the junk-shohere he had bought the diary.
A twinge of fear went through him. It had been a sufficiently rash act tuy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near thlace again. And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wanderis feet had brought him back here of their own accord. It was preciselgainst suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himsely opening the diary. At the same time he noticed that although it waearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open. With the feeling that hould be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, htepped through the doorway. If questioned, he could plausibly say thae was trying to buy razor blades.
The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off anclean but friendly smell. He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail anowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thicpectacles. His hair was almost white, but his eyebrows were bushy antill black. His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fachat he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague aif intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, oerhaps a musician. His voice was soft, as though faded, and his acceness debased than that of the majority of proles.
'I recognized you on the pavement,' he said immediately. 'You're thentleman that bought the young lady's keepsake album. That was a beautifuit of paper, that was. Cream-laid, it used to be called. There's been naper like that made for--oh, I dare say fifty years.' He peered at Winstover the top of his spectacles. 'Is there anything special I can do foou? Or did you just want to look round?'
'I was passing,' said Winston vaguely. 'I just looked in. I don't wannything in particular.'
'It's just as well,' said the other, 'because I don't suppose I could havatisfied you.' He made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed handYou see how it is; an empty shop, you might say. Between you and me, thntique trade's just about finished. No demand any longer, and no stocither. Furniture, china, glass it's all been broken up by degrees. Anf course the metal stuff's mostly been melted down. I haven't seen a brasandlestick in years.'
The tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably full, but theras almost nothing in it of the slightest value. The floorspace was verestricted, because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusticture-frames. In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-ouhisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not everetend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish. Only on mall table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends--lacquerenuffboxes, agate brooches, and the like--which looked as though they mighnclude something interesting. As Winston wandered towards the table hiye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in thamplight, and he picked it up.
It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, makinlmost a hemisphere. There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, ioth the colour and the texture of the glass. At the heart of it, magnifiey the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object thaecalled a rose or a sea anemone.
'What is it?' said Winston, fascinated.
'That's coral, that is,' said the old man. 'It must have come from thndian Ocean. They used to kind of embed it in the glass. That wasn't madess than a hundred years ago. More, by the look of it.'
'It's a beautiful thing,' said Winston.
'It is a beautiful thing,' said the other appreciatively. 'But there's noany that'd say so nowadays.' He coughed. 'Now, if it so happened that yoanted to buy it, that'd cost you four dollars. I can remember when a thinike that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was--well, an't work it out, but it was a lot of money. But who cares about genuinntiques nowadays--even the few that's left?'
Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thinnto his pocket. What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauts the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite differenrom the present one. The soft, rainwatery glass was not like any glashat he had ever seen. The thing was doubly attractive because of itpparent uselessness, though he could guess that it must once have beentended as a paperweight. It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunatelt did not make much of a bulge. It was a queer thing, even a compromisinhing, for a Party member to have in his possession. Anything old, and fohat matter anything beautiful, was always vaguely suspect. The old man harown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars. Winstoealized that he would have accepted three or even two.
'There's another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,' haid. 'There's not much in it. Just a few pieces. We'll do with a light ie're going upstairs.'
He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up thteep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which diot give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest ohimney-pots. Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged ahough the room were meant to be lived in. There was a strip of carpet ohe floor, a picture or two on the walls, and a deep, slatternly arm-chairawn up to the fireplace. An old-fashioned glass clock with a twelve-houace was ticking away on the mantelpiece. Under the window, and occupyinearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mattress stiln it.
'We lived here till my wife died,' said the old man half apologeticallyI'm selling the furniture off by little and little. Now that's a beautifuahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of itut I dare say you'd find it a little bit cumbersome.'
He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, ann the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting. The thoughlitted through Winston's mind that it would probably be quite easy tent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk. Ias a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; buhe room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestraemory. It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit i room like this, in an arm-chair beside an open fire with your feet ihe fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, witobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singinf the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock.
'There's no telescreen!' he could not help murmuring.
'Ah,' said the old man, 'I never had one of those things. Too expensivend I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow. Now that's a nicateleg table in the corner there. Though of course you'd have to put neinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps.'
There was a small bookcase in the other corner, and Winston had alreadravitated towards it. It contained nothing but rubbish. The hunting-downd destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in throle quarters as everywhere else. It was very unlikely that there existenywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960. The olan, still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in osewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposithe bed.
'Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all----' he begaelicately.
Winston came across to examine the picture. It was a steel engraving of aval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front. Theras a railing running round the building, and at the rear end there wahat appeared to be a statue. Winston gazed at it for some moments. Ieemed vaguely familiar, though he did not remember the statue.
'The frame's fixed to the wall,' said the old man, 'but I could unscrew ior you, I dare say.'
'I know that building,' said Winston finally. 'It's a ruin now. It's ihe middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice.'
'That's right. Outside the Law Courts. It was bombed in--oh, many yeargo. It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, its name was.' Hmiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightlidiculous, and added: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!'
'What's that?' said Winston.
'Oh--"Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's." That was a rhyme had when I was a little boy. How it goes on I don't remember, but I dnow it ended up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes hopper to chop off your head." It was a kind of a dance. They held ouheir arms for you to pass under, and when they came to "Here comes hopper to chop off your head" they brought their arms down and caught yout was just names of churches. All the London churches were in it--all thrincipal ones, that is.'
Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged. It was alwayifficult to determine the age of a London building. Anything large anmpressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automaticalllaimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that wabviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middlges. The centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of analue. One could not learn history from architecture any more than onould learn it from books. Statues, inscriptions, memorial stones, thames of streets--anything that might throw light upon the past had beeystematically altered.
'I never knew it had been a church,' he said.
'There's a lot of them left, really,' said the old man, 'though they'veen put to other uses. Now, how did that rhyme go? Ah! I've got it!
  "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's----"
there, now, that's as far as I can get. A farthing, that was a small coppeoin, looked something like a cent.'
'Where was St Martin's?' said Winston.
'St Martin's? That's still standing. It's in Victory Square, alongside thicture gallery. A building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillarn front, and a big flight of steps.'
Winston knew the place well. It was a museum used for propaganda displayf various kinds--scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortressesaxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like.
'St Martin's-in-the-Fields it used to be called,' supplemented the old manthough I don't recollect any fields anywhere in those parts.'
Winston did not buy the picture. It would have been an even morncongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carrome, unless it were taken out of its frame. But he lingered for sominutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was noeeks--as one might have gathered from the inscription over thhop-front--but Charrington. Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower ageixty-three and had inhabited this shop for thirty years. Throughout thaime he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had neveuite got to the point of doing it. All the while that they were talkinhe half-remembered rhyme kept running through Winston's head. Oranges anemons say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, sahe bells of St Martin's! It was curious, but when you said it to yourselou had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost Londohat still existed somewhere or other, disguised and forgotten. From onhostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth. Yet sar as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bellinging.
He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as noo let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out ohe door. He had already made up his mind that after a suitablnterval--a month, say--he would take the risk of visiting the shop againt was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centrehe serious piece of folly had been to come back here in the first placefter buying the diary and without knowing whether the proprietor of thhop could be trusted. However----!
Yes, he thought again, he would come back. He would buy further scraps oeautiful rubbish. He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, takt out of its frame, and carry it home concealed under the jacket of hiveralls. He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington'emory. Even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flasheomentarily through his mind again. For perhaps five seconds exaltatioade him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so mucs a preliminary glance through the window. He had even started hummino an improvised tune
  Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's You owe me three farthings, say the----
Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water. A figurn blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away. It wahe girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair. The lighas failing, but there was no difficulty in recognizing her. She lookeim straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had noeen him.
For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move. Then he turned to thight and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he waoing in the wrong direction. At any rate, one question was settled. Theras no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him. She must havollowed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance shhould have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscurackstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members livedt was too great a coincidence. Whether she was really an agent of thhought Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardlattered. It was enough that she was watching him. Probably she had seeim go into the pub as well.
It was an effort to walk. The lump of glass in his pocket banged againsis thigh at each step, and he was half minded to take it out and throw iway. The worst thing was the pain in his belly. For a couple of minutee had the feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soonut there would be no public lavatories in a quarter like this. Then thpasm passed, leaving a dull ache behind.
The street was a blind alley. Winston halted, stood for several secondondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace hiteps. As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed hihree minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with here could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and themash her skull in with a cobblestone. The piece of glass in his pockeould be heavy enough for the job. But he abandoned the idea immediatelyecause even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable. Hould not run, he could not strike a blow. Besides, she was young and lustnd would defend herself. He thought also of hurrying to the Communitentre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish artial alibi for the evening. But that too was impossible. A deadlassitude had taken hold of him. All he wanted was to get home quickly anhen sit down and be quiet.
It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat. The lightould be switched off at the main at twenty-three thirty. He went into thitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin. Then he went the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawerut he did not open it at once. From the telescreen a brassy female voicas squalling a patriotic song. He sat staring at the marbled cover of thook, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness.
It was at night that they came for you, always at night. The proper thinas to kill yourself before they got you. Undoubtedly some people did soany of the disappearances were actually suicides. But it needed desperatourage to kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick anertain poison, were completely unprocurable. He thought with a kind ostonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treacherf the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the momenhen a special effort is needed. He might have silenced the dark-haireirl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of thxtremity of his danger he had lost the power to act. It struck him than moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external enemy, bulways against one's own body. Even now, in spite of the gin, the dulche in his belly made consecutive thought impossible. And it is the samee perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations. On thattlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues thaou are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up untit fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright ocreaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger oold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth.
He opened the diary. It was important to write something down. The woman the telescreen had started a new song. Her voice seemed to stick intis brain like jagged splinters of glass. He tried to think of O'Brienor whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinkinf the things that would happen to him after the Thought Police took hiway. It would not matter if they killed you at once. To be killed wahat you expected. But before death (nobody spoke of such things, yeverybody knew of them) there was the routine of confession that had te gone through: the grovelling on the floor and screaming for mercy, thrack of broken bones, the smashed teeth and bloody clots of hair.
Why did you have to endure it, since the end was always the same? Why wat not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life? Nobody evescaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess. When once you hauccumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would bead. Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedden future time?
He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image o'Brien. 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' O'Briead said to him. He knew what it meant, or thought he knew. The place wherhere is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never seeut which, by foreknowledge, one could mystically share in. But with thoice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the traif thought further. He put a cigarette in his mouth. Half the tobaccromptly fell out on to his tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult tpit out again. The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing thaf O'Brien. Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out ois pocket and looked at it. The face gazed up at him, heavy, calmrotecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustacheike a leaden knell the words came back at him:
  WAR IS PEAC FREEDOM IS SLAVER IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH
PART TWO
Chapter 1
It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go the lavatory.
A solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the longrightly-lit corridor. It was the girl with dark hair. Four days had gonast since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shops she came nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not noticeablt a distance because it was of the same colour as her overalls. Probablhe had crushed her hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopen which the plots of novels were 'roughed in'. It was a common accidenn the Fiction Department.
They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almoslat on her face. A sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her. She must havallen right on the injured arm. Winston stopped short. The girl had riseo her knees. Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which heouth stood out redder than ever. Her eyes were fixed on his, with appealing expression that looked more like fear than pain.
A curious emotion stirred in Winston's heart. In front of him was an enemho was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creaturen pain and perhaps with a broken bone. Already he had instinctiveltarted forward to help her. In the moment when he had seen her fall ohe bandaged arm, it had been as though he felt the pain in his own body.
'You're hurt?' he said.
'It's nothing. My arm. It'll be all right in a second.'
She spoke as though her heart were fluttering. She had certainly turneery pale.
'You haven't broken anything?'
'No, I'm all right. It hurt for a moment, that's all.'
She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up. She had regaineome of her colour, and appeared very much better.
'It's nothing,' she repeated shortly. 'I only gave my wrist a bit of ang. Thanks, comrade!'
And with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been goings briskly as though it had really been nothing. The whole incident coulot have taken as much as half a minute. Not to let one's feelings appean one's face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinctnd in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreehen the thing happened. Nevertheless it had been very difficult not tetray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he waelping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand. There was nuestion that she had done it intentionally. It was something small anlat. As he passed through the lavatory door he transferred it to hiocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers. It was a scrap of papeolded into a square.
While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little more fingering, tet it unfolded. Obviously there must be a message of some kind written ot. For a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closetnd read it at once. But that would be shocking folly, as he well knewhere was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreenere watched continuously.
He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of papeasually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles anitched the speakwrite towards him. 'Five minutes,' he told himselffive minutes at the very least!' His heart bumped in his breast witrightening loudness. Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on waere routine, the rectification of a long list of figures, not needinlose attention.
Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of politicaeaning. So far as he could see there were two possibilities. One, muche more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Policeust as he had feared. He did not know why the Thought Police shoulhoose to deliver their messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they haheir reasons. The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, ummons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description. But theras another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though hried vainly to suppress it. This was, that the message did not come frohe Thought Police at all, but from some kind of underground organizationerhaps the Brotherhood existed after all! Perhaps the girl was part of ito doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung into his mind in the vernstant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand. It was not till a couplf minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had occurred tim. And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probableant death--still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonablope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty that hept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into thpeakwrite.
He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatiube. Eight minutes had gone by. He re-adjusted his spectacles on his noseighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap oaper on top of it. He flattened it out. On it was written, in a largnformed handwriting:
I LOVE YOU.
For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminatinhing into the memory hole. When he did so, although he knew very well thanger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it oncgain, just to make sure that the words were really there.
For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. What was eveorse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was theed to conceal his agitation from the telescreen. He felt as though ire were burning in his belly. Lunch in the hot, crowded, noise-filleanteen was torment. He had hoped to be alone for a little while durinhe lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the imbecile Parsons floppeown beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell otew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Weeke was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Birother's head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion bis daughter's troop of Spies. The irritating thing was that in the rackef voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and waonstantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated. Just once caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other girls at thar end of the room. She appeared not to have seen him, and he did noook in that direction again.
The afternoon was more bearable. Immediately after lunch there arrived elicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours anecessitated putting everything else aside. It consisted in falsifying eries of production reports of two years ago, in such a way as to casiscredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under loud. This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for morhan two hours he succeeded in shutting the girl out of his minltogether. Then the memory of her face came back, and with it a ragingntolerable desire to be alone. Until he could be alone it was impossiblo think this new development out. Tonight was one of his nights at thommunity Centre. He wolfed another tasteless meal in the canteen, hurrieff to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery of a 'discussion group'layed two games of table tennis, swallowed several glasses of gin, anat for half an hour through a lecture entitled 'Ingsoc in relation thess'. His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulso shirk his evening at the Centre. At the sight of the words I LOVE YOhe desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minoisks suddenly seemed stupid. It was not till twenty-three hours, when has home and in bed--in the darkness, where you were safe even from thelescreen so long as you kept silent--that he was able to thinontinuously.
It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch withe girl and arrange a meeting. He did not consider any longer thossibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him. He knehat it was not so, because of her unmistakable agitation when she handeim the note. Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as welhe might be. Nor did the idea of refusing her advances even cross hiind. Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in wit cobblestone, but that was of no importance. He thought of her nakedouthful body, as he had seen it in his dream. He had imagined her a fooike all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, heelly full of ice. A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he mighose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him! What he feareore than anything else was that she would simply change her mind if hid not get in touch with her quickly. But the physical difficulty oeeting was enormous. It was like trying to make a move at chess when yoere already mated. Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced youctually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred tim within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to thinke went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instrumentn a table.
Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could noe repeated. If she had worked in the Records Department it might haveen comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts ihe building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for goinhere. If he had known where she lived, and at what time she left worke could have contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home; but to tro follow her home was not safe, because it would mean loitering abouutside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed. As for sending etter through the mails, it was out of the question. By a routine thaas not even secret, all letters were opened in transit. Actually, feeople ever wrote letters. For the messages that it was occasionallecessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrasesnd you struck out the ones that were inapplicable. In any case he did nonow the girl's name, let alone her address. Finally he decided that thafest place was the canteen. If he could get her at a table by herselfomewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the telescreens, anith a sufficient buzz of conversation all round--if these conditionndured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to exchange a feords.
For a week after this, life was like a restless dream. On the next day shid not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle havinlready blown. Presumably she had been changed on to a later shift. Theassed each other without a glance. On the day after that she was in thanteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediatelnder a telescreen. Then for three dreadful days she did not appear all. His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearablensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, everound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, agony. Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her image. He diot touch the diary during those days. If there was any relief, it was iis work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at tretch. He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her. Theras no enquiry he could make. She might have been vaporized, she mighave committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other enf Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed heind and decided to avoid him.
The next day she reappeared. Her arm was out of the sling and she had and of sticking-plaster round her wrist. The relief of seeing her wao great that he could not resist staring directly at her for severaeconds. On the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to herhen he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from thall, and was quite alone. It was early, and the place was not very fullhe queue edged forward till Winston was almost at the counter, then waeld up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that had not received his tablet of saccharine. But the girl was still alonhen Winston secured his tray and began to make for her table. He walkeasually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyoner. She was perhaps three metres away from him. Another two seconds woulo it. Then a voice behind him called, 'Smith!' He pretended not to hearSmith!' repeated the voice, more loudly. It was no use. He turned round blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knewas inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table. It was noafe to refuse. After having been recognized, he could not go and sit a table with an unattended girl. It was too noticeable. He sat down wit friendly smile. The silly blond face beamed into his. Winston had allucination of himself smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of ithe girl's table filled up a few minutes later.
But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would takhe hint. Next day he took care to arrive early. Surely enough, she was a table in about the same place, and again alone. The person immediatelhead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like maith a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes. As Winston turned away frohe counter with his tray, he saw that the little man was making straighor the girl's table. His hopes sank again. There was a vacant place at able further away, but something in the little man's appearance suggestehat he would be sufficiently attentive to his own comfort to choose thmptiest table. With ice at his heart Winston followed. It was no usnless he could get the girl alone. At this moment there was a tremendourash. The little man was sprawling on all fours, his tray had gone flyingwo streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor. He starteo his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidentluspected of having tripped him up. But it was all right. Five secondater, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl's table.
He did not look at her. He unpacked his tray and promptly began eatingt was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but no terrible fear had taken possession of him. A week had gone by sinche had first approached him. She would have changed her mind, she musave changed her mind! It was impossible that this affair should enuccessfully; such things did not happen in real life. He might havlinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seempleforth, the hairy-eared poet, wandering limply round the room wit tray, looking for a place to sit down. In his vague way Amplefortas attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table ie caught sight of him. There was perhaps a minute in which to act. Botinston and the girl were eating steadily. The stuff they were eating wa thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans. In a low murmur Winstoegan speaking. Neither of them looked up; steadily they spooned thatery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the feecessary words in low expressionless voices.
'What time do you leave work?'
'Eighteen-thirty.'
'Where can we meet?'
'Victory Square, near the monument.'
'It's full of telescreens.'
'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd.'
'Any signal?'
'No. Don't come up to me until you see me among a lot of people. And don'ook at me. Just keep somewhere near me.'
'What time?'
'Nineteen hours.'
'All right.'
Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at another table. They diot speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another. Thirl finished her lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed tmoke a cigarette.
Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time. He wandered rounhe base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big Brother'tatue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished thurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few yeargo) in the Battle of Airstrip One. In the street in front of it there wa statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliveromwell. At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appearedgain the terrible fear seized upon Winston. She was not coming, she hahanged her mind! He walked slowly up to the north side of the square anot a sort of pale-coloured pleasure from identifying St Martin's Churchhose bells, when it had bells, had chimed 'You owe me three farthings.hen he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, reading oretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column. It was noafe to go near her until some more people had accumulated. There werelescreens all round the pediment. But at this moment there was a din ohouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left. Suddenlveryone seemed to be running across the square. The girl nipped nimblound the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rushinston followed. As he ran, he gathered from some shouted remarks tha convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing.
Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the squareinston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outedge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forwarnto the heart of the crowd. Soon he was within arm's length of the girlut the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormouoman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall olesh. Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge manageo drive his shoulder between them. For a moment it felt as though hintrails were being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then had broken through, sweating a little. He was next to the girl. They werhoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them.
A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machinuns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the streetn the trucks little yellow men in shabby greenish uniforms were squattingammed close together. Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sidef the trucks utterly incurious. Occasionally when a truck jolted theras a clank-clank of metal: all the prisoners were wearing leg-ironsruck-load after truck-load of the sad faces passed. Winston knew theere there but he saw them only intermittently. The girl's shoulder, aner arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his. Her cheek walmost near enough for him to feel its warmth. She had immediately takeharge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen. She begapeaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips bareloving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumblinf the trucks.
'Can you hear me?'
'Yes.'
'Can you get Sunday afternoon off?'
'Yes.'
'Then listen carefully. You'll have to remember this. Go to Paddingtotation----'
With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she outlined thoute that he was to follow. A half-hour railway journey; turn left outsidhe station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top baissing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes dead tree with moss on it. It was as though she had a map inside heead. 'Can you remember all that?' she murmured finally.
'Yes.'
'You turn left, then right, then left again. And the gate's got no top bar.'
'Yes. What time?'
'About fifteen. You may have to wait. I'll get there by another way. Arou sure you remember everything?'
'Yes.'
'Then get away from me as quick as you can.'
She need not have told him that. But for the moment they could noxtricate themselves from the crowd. The trucks were still filing pasthe people still insatiably gaping. At the start there had been a few boond hisses, but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, anad soon stopped. The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity. Foreignershether from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal. Oniterally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even arisoners one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them. Nor dine know what became of them, apart from the few who were hanged aar-criminals: the others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labouamps. The round Mogol faces had given way to faces of a more Europeaype, dirty, bearded and exhausted. From over scrubby cheekbones eyeooked into Winston's, sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed awagain. The convoy was drawing to an end. In the last truck he could see aged man, his face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wristrossed in front of him, as though he were used to having them bounogether. It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part. But at thast moment, while the crowd still hemmed them in, her hand felt for hind gave it a fleeting squeeze.
It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time thaheir hands were clasped together. He had time to learn every detaif her hand. He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, thork-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under thrist. Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight. In thame instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour thirl's eyes were. They were probably brown, but people with dark haiometimes had blue eyes. To turn his head and look at her would haveen inconceivable folly. With hands locked together, invisible amonhe press of bodies, they stared steadily in front of them, and insteaf the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfullt Winston out of nests of hair.
Chapter 2
Winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shadetepping out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted. Under threes to the left of him the ground was misty with bluebells. The aieemed to kiss one's skin. It was the second of May. From somewhere deepen the heart of the wood came the droning of ring-doves.
He was a bit early. There had been no difficulties about the journey, anhe girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than hould normally have been. Presumably she could be trusted to find a saflace. In general you could not assume that you were much safer in thountry than in London. There were no telescreens, of course, but theras always the danger of concealed microphones by which your voice mighe picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey yourself without attracting attention. For distances of less tha00 kilometres it was not necessary to get your passport endorsed, buometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, whxamined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkwaruestions. However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from thtation he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was noeing followed. The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because ohe summery weather. The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled wailled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothlesreat-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternooith 'in-laws' in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winstono get hold of a little black-market butter.
The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told hif, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes. He had no watchut it could not be fifteen yet. The bluebells were so thick underfoohat it was impossible not to tread on them. He knelt down and begaicking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea thae would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when theet. He had got together a big bunch and was smelling their faint sicklcent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of oot on twigs. He went on picking bluebells. It was the best thing to dot might be the girl, or he might have been followed after all. To looound was to show guilt. He picked another and another. A hand felightly on his shoulder.
He looked up. It was the girl. She shook her head, evidently as a warninhat he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the walong the narrow track into the wood. Obviously she had been that waefore, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit. Winston followedtill clasping his bunch of flowers. His first feeling was relief, but ae watched the strong slender body moving in front of him, with the scarleash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of her hips, thense of his own inferiority was heavy upon him. Even now it seemed quitikely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw bacfter all. The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunteim. Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made hieel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust oondon in the pores of his skin. It occurred to him that till now she harobably never seen him in broad daylight in the open. They came to thallen tree that she had spoken of. The girl hopped over and forced aparhe bushes, in which there did not seem to be an opening. When Winstoollowed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassnoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely. The girtopped and turned.
'Here we are,' she said.
He was facing her at several paces' distance. As yet he did not dare movearer to her.
'I didn't want to say anything in the lane,' she went on, 'in case there' mike hidden there. I don't suppose there is, but there could be. There'lways the chance of one of those swine recognizing your voice. We're alight here.'
He still had not the courage to approach her. 'We're all right here?e repeated stupidly.
'Yes. Look at the trees.' They were small ashes, which at some time haeen cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none ohem thicker than one's wrist. 'There's nothing big enough to hide a mikn. Besides, I've been here before.'
They were only making conversation. He had managed to move closer to heow. She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face thaooked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so sloo act. The bluebells had cascaded on to the ground. They seemed to havallen of their own accord. He took her hand.
'Would you believe,' he said, 'that till this moment I didn't know whaolour your eyes were?' They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade orown, with dark lashes. 'Now that you've seen what I'm really likean you still bear to look at me?'
'Yes, easily.'
'I'm thirty-nine years old. I've got a wife that I can't get rid of. I'vot varicose veins. I've got five false teeth.'
'I couldn't care less,' said the girl.
The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in his armst the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity. The youthfuody was strained against his own, the mass of dark hair was against hiace, and yes! actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing thide red mouth. She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was callinim darling, precious one, loved one. He had pulled her down on to thround, she was utterly unresisting, he could do what he liked with herut the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of merontact. All he felt was incredulity and pride. He was glad that this waappening, but he had no physical desire. It was too soon, her youth anrettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living withouomen--he did not know the reason. The girl picked herself up and pulled luebell out of her hair. She sat against him, putting her arm round hiaist.
'Never mind, dear. There's no hurry. We've got the whole afternoon. Isn'his a splendid hide-out? I found it when I got lost once on a communitike. If anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away.'
'What is your name?' said Winston.
'Julia. I know yours. It's Winston--Winston Smith.'
'How did you find that out?'
'I expect I'm better at finding things out than you are, dear. Tell mehat did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?'
He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her. It was even a sort oove-offering to start off by telling the worst.
'I hated the sight of you,' he said. 'I wanted to rape you and then murdeou afterwards. Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head iith a cobblestone. If you really want to know, I imagined that you haomething to do with the Thought Police.'
The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as ribute to the excellence of her disguise.
'Not the Thought Police! You didn't honestly think that?'
'Well, perhaps not exactly that. But from your general appearance--merelecause you're young and fresh and healthy, you understand--I thought tharobably----'
'You thought I was a good Party member. Pure in word and deed. Bannersrocessions, slogans, games, community hikes all that stuff. And yohought that if I had a quarter of a chance I'd denounce you as hought-criminal and get you killed off?'
'Yes, something of that kind. A great many young girls are like thatou know.'
'It's this bloody thing that does it,' she said, ripping off the scarleash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough. Thens though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt ihe pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate. Shroke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. Even before he haaken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate. It waark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper. Chocolate normally waull-brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe itike the smoke of a rubbish fire. But at some time or another he had tastehocolate like the piece she had given him. The first whiff of its scenad stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which waowerful and troubling.
'Where did you get this stuff?' he said.
'Black market,' she said indifferently. 'Actually I am that sort of girlo look at. I'm good at games. I was a troop-leader in the Spies. I doluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League. Hournd hours I've spent pasting their bloody rot all over London. I alwayarry one end of a banner in the processions. I always look cheerful an never shirk anything. Always yell with the crowd, that's what I sayt's the only way to be safe.'
The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Winston's tongue. The tastas delightful. But there was still that memory moving round the edges ois consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definithape, like an object seen out of the corner of one's eye. He pushed iway from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which hould have liked to undo but could not.
'You are very young,' he said. 'You are ten or fifteen years younger tha am. What could you see to attract you in a man like me?'
'It was something in your face. I thought I'd take a chance. I'm good apotting people who don't belong. As soon as I saw you I knew you wergainst THEM.'
THEM, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, abouhom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasylthough he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her languagearty members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldoid swear, aloud, at any rate. Julia, however, seemed unable to mentiohe Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of wordhat you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways. He did not dislike it. Ias merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all its waysnd somehow it seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse thamells bad hay. They had left the clearing and were wandering agaihrough the chequered shade, with their arms round each other's waisthenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast. He noticed how mucofter her waist seemed to feel now that the sash was gone. They did nopeak above a whisper. Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to quietly. Presently they had reached the edge of the little wood. Shtopped him.
'Don't go out into the open. There might be someone watching. We're alight if we keep behind the boughs.'
They were standing in the shade of hazel bushes. The sunlight, filterinhrough innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces. Winston lookeut into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock oecognition. He knew it by sight. An old, close-bitten pasture, with ootpath wandering across it and a molehill here and there. In the raggeedge on the opposite side the boughs of the elm trees swayed juserceptibly in the breeze, and their leaves stirred faintly in densasses like women's hair. Surely somewhere nearby, but out of sighthere must be a stream with green pools where dace were swimming?
'Isn't there a stream somewhere near here?' he whispered.
'That's right, there is a stream. It's at the edge of the next fieldctually. There are fish in it, great big ones. You can watch them lyinn the pools under the willow trees, waving their tails.'
'It's the Golden Country--almost,' he murmured.
'The Golden Country?'
'It's nothing, really. A landscape I've seen sometimes in a dream.'
'Look!' whispered Julia.
A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, almost at the levef their faces. Perhaps it had not seen them. It was in the sun, they ihe shade. It spread out its wings, fitted them carefully into placgain, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisanco the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song. In thfternoon hush the volume of sound was startling. Winston and Julia clunogether, fascinated. The music went on and on, minute after minute, witstonishing variations, never once repeating itself, almost as though third were deliberately showing off its virtuosity. Sometimes it stoppeor a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, then swelled itpeckled breast and again burst into song. Winston watched it with a sorf vague reverence. For whom, for what, was that bird singing? No mateo rival was watching it. What made it sit at the edge of the lonely woond pour its music into nothingness? He wondered whether after all theras a microphone hidden somewhere near. He and Julia had spoken only iow whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it woulick up the thrush. Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some smalleetle-like man was listening intently--listening to that. But by degreehe flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind. It was ahough it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and goixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves. He stoppehinking and merely felt. The girl's waist in the bend of his arm was sofnd warm. He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her bodeemed to melt into his. Wherever his hands moved it was all as yielding aater. Their mouths clung together; it was quite different from the harisses they had exchanged earlier. When they moved their faces apart agaioth of them sighed deeply. The bird took fright and fled with a clattef wings.
Winston put his lips against her ear. 'NOW,' he whispered.
'Not here,' she whispered back. 'Come back to the hide-out. It's safer.'
Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way baco the clearing. When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turnend faced him. They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeareound the corners of her mouth. She stood looking at him for an instanthen felt at the zipper of her overalls. And, yes! it was almost as in hiream. Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clotheff, and when she flung them aside it was with that same magnificenesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated. Her bodleamed white in the sun. But for a moment he did not look at her bodyis eyes were anchored by the freckled face with its faint, bold smilee knelt down before her and took her hands in his.
'Have you done this before?'
'Of course. Hundreds of times--well, scores of times, anyway.'
'With Party members?'
'Yes, always with Party members.'
'With members of the Inner Party?'
'Not with those swine, no. But there's plenty that WOULD if they got hal chance. They're not so holy as they make out.'
His heart leapt. Scores of times she had done it: he wished it had beeundreds--thousands. Anything that hinted at corruption always filled hiith a wild hope. Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surfacets cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealinniquity. If he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy oyphilis, how gladly he would have done so! Anything to rot, to weaken, tndermine! He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face.
'Listen. The more men you've had, the more I love you. Do you understanhat?'
'Yes, perfectly.'
'I hate purity, I hate goodness! I don't want any virtue to exist anywhere want everyone to be corrupt to the bones.'
'Well then, I ought to suit you, dear. I'm corrupt to the bones.'
'You like doing this? I don't mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself?'
'I adore it.'
That was above all what he wanted to hear. Not merely the love of onerson but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire: thaas the force that would tear the Party to pieces. He pressed her dowpon the grass, among the fallen bluebells. This time there was nifficulty. Presently the rising and falling of their breasts slowed tormal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness they fell apart. Thun seemed to have grown hotter. They were both sleepy. He reached out fohe discarded overalls and pulled them partly over her. Almost immediatelhey fell asleep and slept for about half an hour.
Winston woke first. He sat up and watched the freckled face, stileacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand. Except for her mouthou could not call her beautiful. There was a line or two round the eyesf you looked closely. The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick anoft. It occurred to him that he still did not know her surname or wherhe lived.
The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pityingrotecting feeling. But the mindless tenderness that he had felt undehe hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come backe pulled the overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank. In thld days, he thought, a man looked at a girl's body and saw that it waesirable, and that was the end of the story. But you could not have purove or pure lust nowadays. No emotion was pure, because everything waixed up with fear and hatred. Their embrace had been a battle, the clima victory. It was a blow struck against the Party. It was a political act.
Chapter 3
'We can come here once again,' said Julia. 'It's generally safe to use anide-out twice. But not for another month or two, of course.'
As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed. She became alert anusiness-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about heaist, and began arranging the details of the journey home. It seemeatural to leave this to her. She obviously had a practical cunning whicinston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of thountryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikeshe route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he haome, and brought him out at a different railway station. 'Never go homhe same way as you went out,' she said, as though enunciating an importaneneral principle. She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half aour before following her.
She had named a place where they could meet after work, four eveningence. It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was apen market which was generally crowded and noisy. She would be hanginbout among the stalls, pretending to be in search of shoelaces oewing-thread. If she judged that the coast was clear she would bloer nose when he approached; otherwise he was to walk past her withouecognition. But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would bafe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting.
'And now I must go,' she said as soon as he had mastered his instructionsI'm due back at nineteen-thirty. I've got to put in two hours for thunior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something. Isn't iloody? Give me a brush-down, would you? Have I got any twigs in my hairre you sure? Then good-bye, my love, good-bye!'
She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a momenater pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wooith very little noise. Even now he had not found out her surname or heddress. However, it made no difference, for it was inconceivable thahey could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication.
As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood. Durinhe month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actuallucceeded in making love. That was in another hiding-place known to Juliahe belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of countrhere an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier. It was a gooiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was verangerous. For the rest they could meet only in the streets, in a differenlace every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time. In thtreet it was usually possible to talk, after a fashion. As they drifteown the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at onnother, they carried on a curious, intermittent conversation which flicken and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silency the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a telescreen, theaken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptlut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost withountroduction on the following day. Julia appeared to be quite used to thiind of conversation, which she called 'talking by instalments'. She walso surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips. Just once ilmost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss. Theere passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak whehey were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, tharth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on hiide, bruised and terrified. A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near aand. Suddenly he became aware of Julia's face a few centimetres from hiwn, deathly white, as white as chalk. Even her lips were white. She waead! He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a livarm face. But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of hiips. Both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster.
There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had talk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come rounhe corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead. Even if it had beeess dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meetinston's working week was sixty hours, Julia's was even longer, anheir free days varied according to the pressure of work and did noften coincide. Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely freehe spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures anemonstrations, distributing literature for the junior Anti-Sex Leaguereparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savingampaign, and such-like activities. It paid, she said, it was camouflagef you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones. She even induceinston to mortgage yet another of his evenings by enrolling himself fohe part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Partembers. So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysinoredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably partf bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking oammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens.
When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentaronversation were filled up. It was a blazing afternoon. The air in thittle square chamber above the bells was hot and stagnant, and smelverpoweringly of pigeon dung. They sat talking for hours on the dustywig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time tast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming.
Julia was twenty-six years old. She lived in a hostel with thirty otheirls ('Always in the stink of women! How I hate women!' she saiarenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writinachines in the Fiction Department. She enjoyed her work, which consistehiefly in running and servicing a powerful but tricky electric motorhe was 'not clever', but was fond of using her hands and felt at homith machinery. She could describe the whole process of composing a novelrom the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to thinal touching-up by the Rewrite Squad. But she was not interested in thinished product. She 'didn't much care for reading,' she said. Books werust a commodity that had to be produced, like jam or bootlaces.
She had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the onlerson she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before thevolution was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight. Achool she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnasticrophy two years running. She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and ranch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Seeague. She had always borne an excellent character. She had even (anfallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornoseche sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheaornography for distribution among the proles. It was nicknamed Muck Housy the people who worked in it, she remarked. There she had remained fo year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with titles likSpanking Stories' or 'One Night in a Girls' School', to be boughurtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that theere buying something illegal.
'What are these books like?' said Winston curiously.
'Oh, ghastly rubbish. They're boring, really. They only have six plotsut they swap them round a bit. Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes was never in the Rewrite Squad. I'm not literary, dear--not even enougor that.'
He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except theads of the departments, were girls. The theory was that men, whose senstincts were less controllable than those of women, were in greateanger of being corrupted by the filth they handled.
'They don't even like having married women there,' she added. Girls arlways supposed to be so pure. Here's one who isn't, anyway.
She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party membef sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest. 'And a good job too,aid Julia, 'otherwise they'd have had my name out of him when honfessed.' Since then there had been various others. Life as she saw ias quite simple. You wanted a good time; 'they', meaning the Partyanted to stop you having it; you broke the rules as best you could. Sheemed to think it just as natural that 'they' should want to rob you oour pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught. She hatehe Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no generariticism of it. Except where it touched upon her own life she had nnterest in Party doctrine. He noticed that she never used Newspeak wordxcept the ones that had passed into everyday use. She had never heard ohe Brotherhood, and refused to believe in its existence. Any kind organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failuretruck her as stupid. The clever thing was to break the rules and stalive all the same. He wondered vaguely how many others like her theright be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world ohe Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as somethinnalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simplvading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog.
They did not discuss the possibility of getting married. It was too remoto be worth thinking about. No imaginable committee would ever sanctiouch a marriage even if Katharine, Winston's wife, could somehow have beeot rid of. It was hopeless even as a daydream.
'What was she like, your wife?' said Julia.
'She was--do you know the Newspeak word GOODTHINKFUL? Meaning naturallrthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?'
'No, I didn't know the word, but I know the kind of person, right enough.'
He began telling her the story of his married life, but curiously enoughe appeared to know the essential parts of it already. She describeo him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening oatharine's body as soon as he touched her, the way in which she stileemed to be pushing him from her with all her strength, even when herms were clasped tightly round him. With Julia he felt no difficulty ialking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to b painful memory and became merely a distasteful one.
'I could have stood it if it hadn't been for one thing,' he said. He toler about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to ghrough on the same night every week. 'She hated it, but nothing woulake her stop doing it. She used to call it--but you'll never guess.'
'Our duty to the Party,' said Julia promptly.
'How did you know that?'
'I've been at school too, dear. Sex talks once a month for thver-sixteens. And in the Youth Movement. They rub it into you for years dare say it works in a lot of cases. But of course you can never telleople are such hypocrites.'
She began to enlarge upon the subject. With Julia, everything came baco her own sexuality. As soon as this was touched upon in any way she waapable of great acuteness. Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inneeaning of the Party's sexual puritanism. It was not merely that the senstinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party's contrond which therefore had to be destroyed if possible. What was mormportant was that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirablecause it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. The wahe put it was:
'When you make love you're using up energy; and afterwards you feel happnd don't give a damn for anything. They can't bear you to feel like thathey want you to be bursting with energy all the time. All this marchinp and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour. Iou're happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brothend the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest oheir bloody rot?'
That was very true, he thought. There was a direct intimate connexioetween chastity and political orthodoxy. For how could the fear, thatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members bept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instincnd using it as a driving force? The sex impulse was dangerous to tharty, and the Party had turned it to account. They had played a similarick with the instinct of parenthood. The family could not actually bbolished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of theihildren, in almost the old-fashioned way. The children, on the other handere systematically turned against their parents and taught to spy on thend report their deviations. The family had become in effect an extensiof the Thought Police. It was a device by means of which everyone could burrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately.
Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine. Katharine would unquestionablave denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not happened to be totupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions. But what really recalleer to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, whicad brought the sweat out on his forehead. He began telling Julia oomething that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on anotheweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago.
It was three or four months after they were married. They had lost theiay on a community hike somewhere in Kent. They had only lagged behinhe others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, anresently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chaluarry. It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at thottom. There was nobody of whom they could ask the way. As soon as shealized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy. To be awarom the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling orong-doing. She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and starearching in the other direction. But at this moment Winston noticed somufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath themne tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing ohe same root. He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he calleo Katharine to come and look at it.
'Look, Katharine! Look at those flowers. That clump down near the bottomo you see they're two different colours?'
She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back fo moment. She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he waointing. He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand oer waist to steady her. At this moment it suddenly occurred to him hoompletely alone they were. There was not a human creature anywhere, not eaf stirring, not even a bird awake. In a place like this the danger thahere would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was icrophone it would only pick up sounds. It was the hottest sleepiest houf the afternoon. The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled hiace. And the thought struck him...
'Why didn't you give her a good shove?' said Julia. 'I would have.'
'Yes, dear, you would have. I would, if I'd been the same person then a am now. Or perhaps I would--I'm not certain.'
'Are you sorry you didn't?'
'Yes. On the whole I'm sorry I didn't.'
They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor. He pulled her closegainst him. Her head rested on his shoulder, the pleasant smell of heair conquering the pigeon dung. She was very young, he thought, shtill expected something from life, she did not understand that to pusn inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing.
'Actually it would have made no difference,' he said.
'Then why are you sorry you didn't do it?'
'Only because I prefer a positive to a negative. In this game that we'rlaying, we can't win. Some kinds of failure are better than other kindshat's all.'
He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent. She always contradicteim when he said anything of this kind. She would not accept it as a laf nature that the individual is always defeated. In a way she realizehat she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police woulatch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believehat it was somehow possible to construct a secret world in which you coulive as you chose. All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness. Shid not understand that there was no such thing as happiness, that thnly victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that frohe moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yoursels a corpse.
'We are the dead,' he said.
'We're not dead yet,' said Julia prosaically.
'Not physically. Six months, a year--five years, conceivably. I am afraif death. You are young, so presumably you're more afraid of it than I ambviously we shall put it off as long as we can. But it makes very littlifference. So long as human beings stay human, death and life are thame thing.'
'Oh, rubbish! Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? Don'ou enjoy being alive? Don't you like feeling: This is me, this is my handhis is my leg, I'm real, I'm solid, I'm alive! Don't you like THIS?'
She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him. He could feeer breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls. Her body seemed to bouring some of its youth and vigour into his.
'Yes, I like that,' he said.
'Then stop talking about dying. And now listen, dear, we've got to fip about the next time we meet. We may as well go back to the place ihe wood. We've given it a good long rest. But you must get there by ifferent way this time. I've got it all planned out. You take thrain--but look, I'll draw it out for you.'
And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dustnd with a twig from a pigeon's nest began drawing a map on the floor.
Chapter 4
Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington's shopeside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets an coverless bolster. The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face waicking away on the mantelpiece. In the corner, on the gateleg table, thlass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly ouf the half-darkness.
In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cupsrovided by Mr Charrington. Winston lit the burner and set a pan of wateo boil. He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and somaccharine tablets. The clock's hands said seventeen-twenty: it waineteen-twenty really. She was coming at nineteen-thirty.
Folly, folly, his heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal follyf all the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the leasossible to conceal. Actually the idea had first floated into his head ihe form of a vision, of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surfacf the gateleg table. As he had foreseen, Mr Charrington had made nifficulty about letting the room. He was obviously glad of the few dollarhat it would bring him. Nor did he seem shocked or become offensivelnowing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purposf a love-affair. Instead he looked into the middle distance and spoke ieneralities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that had become partly invisible. Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thingveryone wanted a place where they could be alone occasionally. And whehey had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knef it to keep his knowledge to himself. He even, seeming almost to fadut of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to thouse, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley.
Under the window somebody was singing. Winston peeped out, secure in throtection of the muslin curtain. The June sun was still high in the skynd in the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Normaillar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about heiddle, was stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes lineegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized aabies' diapers. Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs shas singing in a powerful contralto:
  It was only an 'opeless fancy It passed like an Ipril dye But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!
The tune had been haunting London for weeks past. It was one of countlesimilar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section ohe Music Department. The words of these songs were composed without anuman intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificatorut the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into almost pleasant sound. He could hear the woman singing and the scrape oer shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the streetnd somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet thoom seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a telescreen.
Folly, folly, folly! he thought again. It was inconceivable that they coulrequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught. Buhe temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoornd near at hand, had been too much for both of them. For some timfter their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible to arrangeetings. Working hours had been drastically increased in anticipation oate Week. It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complereparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybodyinally both of them managed to secure a free afternoon on the same dayhey had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood. On the evenineforehand they met briefly in the street. As usual, Winston hardly looket Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from thhort glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was paler than usual.
'It's all off,' she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speakTomorrow, I mean.'
'What?'
'Tomorrow afternoon. I can't come.'
'Why not?'
'Oh, the usual reason. It's started early this time.'
For a moment he was violently angry. During the month that he had knower the nature of his desire for her had changed. At the beginning therad been little true sensuality in it. Their first love-making had beeimply an act of the will. But after the second time it was different. Thmell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemeo have got inside him, or into the air all round him. She had become hysical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that had a right to. When she said that she could not come, he had the feelinhat she was cheating him. But just at this moment the crowd pressehem together and their hands accidentally met. She gave the tips of hiingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection. Itruck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointmenust be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he haot felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him. He wished that theere a married couple of ten years' standing. He wished that he weralking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openlnd without fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for thousehold. He wished above all that they had some place where they coule alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every timhey met. It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on thollowing day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington's room had occurreo him. When he suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpecteeadiness. Both of them knew that it was lunacy. It was as though they werntentionally stepping nearer to their graves. As he sat waiting on thdge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Lovet was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one'onsciousness. There it lay, fixed in future times, preceding death aurely as 99 precedes 100. One could not avoid it, but one could perhapostpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilfuct, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened.
At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs. Julia burst into thoom. She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he haometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry. He started forwaro take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedlyartly because she was still holding the tool-bag.
'Half a second,' she said. 'Just let me show you what I've brought. Diou bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? I thought you would. Yoan chuck it away again, because we shan't be needing it. Look here.'
She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spannernd a screwdriver that filled the top part of it. Underneath were a numbef neat paper packets. The first packet that she passed to Winston had trange and yet vaguely familiar feeling. It was filled with some kind oeavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it.
'It isn't sugar?' he said.
'Real sugar. Not saccharine, sugar. And here's a loaf of bread--propehite bread, not our bloody stuff--and a little pot of jam. And here's in of milk--but look! This is the one I'm really proud of. I had to wra bit of sacking round it, because----'
But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up. The smell walready filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanatiorom his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with eveow, blowing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itselysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then losgain.
'It's coffee,' he murmured, 'real coffee.'
'It's Inner Party coffee. There's a whole kilo here,' she said.
'How did you manage to get hold of all these things?'
'It's all Inner Party stuff. There's nothing those swine don't haveothing. But of course waiters and servants and people pinch thingsnd--look, I got a little packet of tea as well.'
Winston had squatted down beside her. He tore open a corner of the packet.
'It's real tea. Not blackberry leaves.'
'There's been a lot of tea about lately. They've captured India, oomething,' she said vaguely. 'But listen, dear. I want you to turn youack on me for three minutes. Go and sit on the other side of the bedon't go too near the window. And don't turn round till I tell you.'
Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain. Down in the yarhe red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub anhe line. She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deeeeling:
  They sye that time 'eals all things They sye you can always forget But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the year They twist my 'eart-strings yet!
She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed. Her voice floatepward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort oappy melancholy. One had the feeling that she would have been perfectlontent, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothenexhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapernd singing rubbish. It struck him as a curious fact that he had neveeard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously. It would eveave seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking tneself. Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvatioevel that they had anything to sing about.
'You can turn round now,' said Julia.
He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her. What had actually expected was to see her naked. But she was not naked. Thransformation that had happened was much more surprising than that. Shad painted her face.
She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and bougherself a complete set of make-up materials. Her lips were deeply reddeneder cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of somethinnder the eyes to make them brighter. It was not very skilfully done, buinston's standards in such matters were not high. He had never beforeen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face. Thmprovement in her appearance was startling. With just a few dabs of coloun the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, abovll, far more feminine. Her short hair and boyish overalls merely addeo the effect. As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violetlooded his nostrils. He remembered the half-darkness of a basemenitchen, and a woman's cavernous mouth. It was the very same scent thahe had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter.
'Scent too!' he said.
'Yes, dear, scent too. And do you know what I'm going to do next? I'oing to get hold of a real woman's frock from somewhere and wear instead of these bloody trousers. I'll wear silk stockings and high-heelehoes! In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.'
They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed. Ias the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presencentil now he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, withe varicose veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patcver his ankle. There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on wahreadbare and smooth, and the size and springiness of the bed astonisheoth of them. 'It's sure to be full of bugs, but who cares?' said Juliane never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the prolesinston had occasionally slept in one in his boyhood: Julia had never been one before, so far as she could remember.
Presently they fell asleep for a little while. When Winston woke up thands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine. He did not stir, becausulia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm. Most of heake-up had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a lightain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone. A yellow rarom the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up thireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast. Down in the yarhe woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated irom the street. He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it haeen a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summevening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chosealking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simplying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside. Surely there coulever have been a time when that seemed ordinary? Julia woke up, rubbeer eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove.
'Half that water's boiled away,' she said. 'I'll get up and make somoffee in another moment. We've got an hour. What time do they cut thights off at your flats?'
'Twenty-three thirty.'
'It's twenty-three at the hostel. But you have to get in earlier than thatecause--Hi! Get out, you filthy brute!'
She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floornd sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactls he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning durinhe Two Minutes Hate.
'What was it?' he said in surprise.
'A rat. I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting. There's ole down there. I gave him a good fright, anyway.'
'Rats!' murmured Winston. 'In this room!'
'They're all over the place,' said Julia indifferently as she lay dowgain. 'We've even got them in the kitchen at the hostel. Some parts oondon are swarming with them. Did you know they attack children? Yeshey do. In some of these streets a woman daren't leave a baby alone fowo minutes. It's the great huge brown ones that do it. And the nasthing is that the brutes always----'
'DON'T GO ON!' said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut.
'Dearest! You've gone quite pale. What's the matter? Do they make you feeick?'
'Of all horrors in the world--a rat!'
She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as thougo reassure him with the warmth of her body. He did not reopen his eyemmediately. For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in ightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life. It walways very much the same. He was standing in front of a wall of darknessnd on the other side of it there was something unendurable, something toreadful to be faced. In the dream his deepest feeling was always one oelf-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall oarkness. With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his owrain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open. He always wokp without discovering what it was: but somehow it was connected with whaulia had been saying when he cut her short.
'I'm sorry,' he said, 'it's nothing. I don't like rats, that's all.'
'Don't worry, dear, we're not going to have the filthy brutes in here'll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go. And next time wome here I'll bring some plaster and bung it up properly.'
Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten. Feeling slightlshamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead. Julia got out of bedulled on her overalls, and made the coffee. The smell that rose from thaucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lesnybody outside should notice it and become inquisitive. What was eveetter than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to it bhe sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharineith one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the otherulia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcaseointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table, plumping herselown in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examininhe absurd twelve-hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement. She broughhe glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a betteight. He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the softainwatery appearance of the glass.
'What is it, do you think?' said Julia.
'I don't think it's anything--I mean, I don't think it was ever put to anse. That's what I like about it. It's a little chunk of history thahey've forgotten to alter. It's a message from a hundred years ago, ine knew how to read it.'
'And that picture over there'--she nodded at the engraving on the oppositall--'would that be a hundred years old?'
'More. Two hundred, I dare say. One can't tell. It's impossible to discovehe age of anything nowadays.'
She went over to look at it. 'Here's where that brute stuck his nose out,he said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture. 'What ihis place? I've seen it before somewhere.'
'It's a church, or at least it used to be. St Clement Danes its name was.he fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught him came back intis head, and he added half-nostalgically: "Oranges and lemons, say thells of St Clement's!"
To his astonishment she capped the line:
  'You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey----'
'I can't remember how it goes on after that. But anyway I remember it endp, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to choff your head!"'
It was like the two halves of a countersign. But there must be anotheine after 'the bells of Old Bailey'. Perhaps it could be dug out or Charrington's memory, if he were suitably prompted.
'Who taught you that?' he said.
'My grandfather. He used to say it to me when I was a little girl. He waaporized when I was eight--at any rate, he disappeared. I wonder what emon was,' she added inconsequently. 'I've seen oranges. They're a kinf round yellow fruit with a thick skin.'
'I can remember lemons,' said Winston. 'They were quite common in thifties. They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smelhem.'
'I bet that picture's got bugs behind it,' said Julia. 'I'll take it downd give it a good clean some day. I suppose it's almost time we wereaving. I must start washing this paint off. What a bore! I'll get thipstick off your face afterwards.'
Winston did not get up for a few minutes more. The room was darkening. Hurned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweighthe inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but thnterior of the glass itself. There was such a depth of it, and yet it walmost as transparent as air. It was as though the surface of the glasad been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmospheromplete. He had the feeling that he could get inside it, and that iact he was inside it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg tablend the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself. Thaperweight was the room he was in, and the coral was Julia's life and hiwn, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the crystal.
Chapter 5
Syme had vanished. A morning came, and he was missing from work: a fehoughtless people commented on his absence. On the next day nobodentioned him. On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of thecords Department to look at the notice-board. One of the notices carrie printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme haeen one. It looked almost exactly as it had looked before--nothing haeen crossed out--but it was one name shorter. It was enough. Syme haeased to exist: he had never existed.
The weather was baking hot. In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowlessir-conditioned rooms kept their normal temperature, but outside thavements scorched one's feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush houras a horror. The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and thtaffs of all the Ministries were working overtime. Processions, meetingsilitary parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreerogrammes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigieuilt, slogans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographaked. Julia's unit in the Fiction Department had been taken off throduction of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphletsinston, in addition to his regular work, spent long periods every day ioing through back files of 'The Times' and altering and embellishing newtems which were to be quoted in speeches. Late at night, when crowds oowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air. Thocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and sometimes in the far distanchere were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about whichere were wild rumours.
The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Songt was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly pluggen the telescreens. It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactle called music, but resembled the beating of a drum. Roared out bundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying. Throles had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competeith the still-popular 'It was only a hopeless fancy'. The Parsons childrelayed it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and iece of toilet paper. Winston's evenings were fuller than ever. Squads oolunteers, organized by Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Weektitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, anerilously slinging wires across the street for the reception of streamersarsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundreetres of bunting. He was in his native element and as happy as a larkhe heat and the manual work had even given him a pretext for revertino shorts and an open shirt in the evenings. He was everywhere at onceushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jollying everyone alonith comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body whaeemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid-smelling sweat.
A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London. It had no captionnd represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, threr four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian facnd enormous boots, a submachine gun pointed from his hip. From whatevengle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by thoreshortening, seemed to be pointed straight at you. The thing had beelastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering thortraits of Big Brother. The proles, normally apathetic about the warere being lashed into one of their periodical frenzies of patriotisms though to harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had beeilling larger numbers of people than usual. One fell on a crowded filheatre in Stepney, burying several hundred victims among the ruins. Thhole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailinuneral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation meetingnother bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a playgrounnd several dozen children were blown to pieces. There were further angremonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of thoster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, an number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew rounhat spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, ann old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had theiouse set on fire and perished of suffocation.
In the room over Mr Charrington's shop, when they could get there, Julind Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open windowaked for the sake of coolness. The rat had never come back, but the bugad multiplied hideously in the heat. It did not seem to matter. Dirty olean, the room was paradise. As soon as they arrived they would sprinklverything with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothesnd make love with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find thahe bugs had rallied and were massing for the counter-attack.
Four, five, six--seven times they met during the month of June. Winstoad dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours. He seemed to have loshe need for it. He had grown fatter, his varicose ulcer had subsidedeaving only a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits ooughing in the early morning had stopped. The process of life had ceaseo be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at thelescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice. Now that they had ecure hiding-place, almost a home, it did not even seem a hardship thahey could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours at a timehat mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should exist. To knohat it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being in it. The rooas a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walkr Charrington, thought Winston, was another extinct animal. He usualltopped to talk with Mr Charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairshe old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, and on the otheand to have almost no customers. He led a ghostlike existence between thiny, dark shop, and an even tinier back kitchen where he prepared hieals and which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancienramophone with an enormous horn. He seemed glad of the opportunity talk. Wandering about among his worthless stock, with his long nose anhick spectacles and his bowed shoulders in the velvet jacket, he halways vaguely the air of being a collector rather than a tradesmanith a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this scrap of rubbish ohat--a china bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a broken snuffbox, inchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead baby's hair--nevesking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should admire it. Talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out musical-boxe had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments oorgotten rhymes. There was one about four and twenty blackbirds, annother about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about the deatf poor Cock Robin. 'It just occurred to me you might be interested,' hould say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a neragment. But he could never recall more than a few lines of any onhyme.
Both of them knew--in a way, it was never out of their minds that whaas now happening could not last long. There were times when the fact ompending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they woulling together with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned sourasping at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within fivinutes of striking. But there were also times when they had the illusioot only of safety but of permanence. So long as they were actually ihis room, they both felt, no harm could come to them. Getting there waifficult and dangerous, but the room itself was sanctuary. It was as wheinston had gazed into the heart of the paperweight, with the feeling that would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once insidt time could be arrested. Often they gave themselves up to daydreams oscape. Their luck would hold indefinitely, and they would carry on theintrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their natural lives. Oatharine would die, and by subtle manoeuvrings Winston and Julia woulucceed in getting married. Or they would commit suicide together. Ohey would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn to speaith proletarian accents, get jobs in a factory and live out their livendetected in a back-street. It was all nonsense, as they both knew. Ieality there was no escape. Even the one plan that was practicableuicide, they had no intention of carrying out. To hang on from day to dand from week to week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemen unconquerable instinct, just as one's lungs will always draw the nexreath so long as there is air available.
Sometimes, too, they talked of engaging in active rebellion against tharty, but with no notion of how to take the first step. Even if thabulous Brotherhood was a reality, there still remained the difficultf finding one's way into it. He told her of the strange intimacy thaxisted, or seemed to exist, between himself and O'Brien, and of thmpulse he sometimes felt, simply to walk into O'Brien's presence, announchat he was the enemy of the Party, and demand his help. Curiously enoughhis did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing to do. She was used tudging people by their faces, and it seemed natural to her that Winstohould believe O'Brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a single flasf the eyes. Moreover she took it for granted that everyone, or nearlveryone, secretly hated the Party and would break the rules if he thought safe to do so. But she refused to believe that widespread, organizepposition existed or could exist. The tales about Goldstein and hinderground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish which the Partad invented for its own purposes and which you had to pretend to believn. Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous demonstrationshe had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of people whosames she had never heard and in whose supposed crimes she had not thaintest belief. When public trials were happening she had taken her placn the detachments from the Youth League who surrounded the courts froorning to night, chanting at intervals 'Death to the traitors!' Durinhe Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting insultt Goldstein. Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was anhat doctrines he was supposed to represent. She had grown up since thevolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of thifties and sixties. Such a thing as an independent political movement wautside her imagination: and in any case the Party was invincible. Iould always exist, and it would always be the same. You could only rebegainst it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts oiolence such as killing somebody or blowing something up.
In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptiblo Party propaganda. Once when he happened in some connexion to mentiohe war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that in hepinion the war was not happening. The rocket bombs which fell daily oondon were probably fired by the Government of Oceania itself, 'just teep people frightened'. This was an idea that had literally never occurreo him. She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that durinhe Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting ouaughing. But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when then some way touched upon her own life. Often she was ready to accephe official mythology, simply because the difference between truth analsehood did not seem important to her. She believed, for instance, havinearnt it at school, that the Party had invented aeroplanes. (In his owchooldays, Winston remembered, in the late fifties, it was only thelicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years laterhen Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; oneneration more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when hold her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and lonefore the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally uninteresting. Aftell, what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes? It was rather morf a shock to him when he discovered from some chance remark that she diot remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasind at peace with Eurasia. It was true that she regarded the whole war a sham: but apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemad changed. 'I thought we'd always been at war with Eurasia,' she saiaguely. It frightened him a little. The invention of aeroplanes daterom long before her birth, but the switchover in the war had happenenly four years ago, well after she was grown up. He argued with her about for perhaps a quarter of an hour. In the end he succeeded in forciner memory back until she did dimly recall that at one time Eastasia anot Eurasia had been the enemy. But the issue still struck her animportant. 'Who cares?' she said impatiently. 'It's always one bloodar after another, and one knows the news is all lies anyway.'
Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudenorgeries that he committed there. Such things did not appear to horrifer. She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thoughf lies becoming truths. He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, anutherford and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held betweeis fingers. It did not make much impression on her. At first, indeed, shailed to grasp the point of the story.
'Were they friends of yours?' she said.
'No, I never knew them. They were Inner Party members. Besides, they werar older men than I was. They belonged to the old days, before thevolution. I barely knew them by sight.'
'Then what was there to worry about? People are being killed off all thime, aren't they?'
He tried to make her understand. 'This was an exceptional case. It wasn'ust a question of somebody being killed. Do you realize that the pasttarting from yesterday, has been actually abolished? If it survivenywhere, it's in a few solid objects with no words attached to them, likhat lump of glass there. Already we know almost literally nothing abouhe Revolution and the years before the Revolution. Every record has beeestroyed or falsified, every book has been rewritten, every picture haeen repainted, every statue and street and building has been renamedvery date has been altered. And that process is continuing day by day aninute by minute. History has stopped. Nothing exists except an endlesresent in which the Party is always right. I know, of course, that thast is falsified, but it would never be possible for me to prove it, evehen I did the falsification myself. After the thing is done, no evidencver remains. The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don't knoith any certainty that any other human being shares my memories. Just ihat one instance, in my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evidencfter the event--years after it.'
'And what good was that?'
'It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes later. But if thame thing happened today, I should keep it.'
'Well, I wouldn't!' said Julia. 'I'm quite ready to take risks, but onlor something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper. What could yoave done with it even if you had kept it?'
'Not much, perhaps. But it was evidence. It might have planted a few doubtere and there, supposing that I'd dared to show it to anybody. I don'magine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime. But one can imaginittle knots of resistance springing up here and there--small groups oeople banding themselves together, and gradually growing, and even leavin few records behind, so that the next generations can carry on where weave off.'
'I'm not interested in the next generation, dear. I'm interested in US.'
'You're only a rebel from the waist downwards,' he told her.
She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight.
In the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interesthenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, thutability of the past, and the denial of objective reality, and to usewspeak words, she became bored and confused and said that she never painy attention to that kind of thing. One knew that it was all rubbish, shy let oneself be worried by it? She knew when to cheer and when to boond that was all one needed. If he persisted in talking of such subjectshe had a disconcerting habit of falling asleep. She was one of thoseople who can go to sleep at any hour and in any position. Talking to here realized how easy it was to present an appearance of orthodoxy whilaving no grasp whatever of what orthodoxy meant. In a way, the world-vief the Party imposed itself most successfully on people incapable onderstanding it. They could be made to accept the most flagrant violationf reality, because they never fully grasped the enormity of what waemanded of them, and were not sufficiently interested in public events totice what was happening. By lack of understanding they remained sanehey simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harmecause it left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pasndigested through the body of a bird.
Chapter 6
It had happened at last. The expected message had come. All his life, ieemed to him, he had been waiting for this to happen.
He was walking down the long corridor at the Ministry and he was almost the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he becamware that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him. Therson, whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude tpeaking. Winston stopped abruptly and turned. It was O'Brien.
At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse wao run away. His heart bounded violently. He would have been incapable opeaking. O'Brien, however, had continued forward in the same movementaying a friendly hand for a moment on Winston's arm, so that the two ohem were walking side by side. He began speaking with the peculiar gravourtesy that differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members.
'I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,' he said. 'I waeading one of your Newspeak articles in 'The Times' the other day. Yoake a scholarly interest in Newspeak, I believe?'
Winston had recovered part of his self-possession. 'Hardly scholarly,' haid. 'I'm only an amateur. It's not my subject. I have never had anythino do with the actual construction of the language.'
'But you write it very elegantly,' said O'Brien. 'That is not only my owpinion. I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly axpert. His name has slipped my memory for the moment.'
Again Winston's heart stirred painfully. It was inconceivable that thias anything other than a reference to Syme. But Syme was not only deade was abolished, an unperson. Any identifiable reference to him would haveen mortally dangerous. O'Brien's remark must obviously have been intendes a signal, a codeword. By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he haurned the two of them into accomplices. They had continued to strollowly down the corridor, but now O'Brien halted. With the curiousisarming friendliness that he always managed to put in to the gesture hesettled his spectacles on his nose. Then he went on:
'What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed yoad used two words which have become obsolete. But they have only becomo very recently. Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeaictionary?'
'No,' said Winston. 'I didn't think it had been issued yet. We are stilsing the ninth in the Records Department.'
'The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe. But ew advance copies have been circulated. I have one myself. It mighnterest you to look at it, perhaps?'
'Very much so,' said Winston, immediately seeing where this tended.
'Some of the new developments are most ingenious. The reduction in thumber of verbs--that is the point that will appeal to you, I think. Lee see, shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary? But I afraid I invariably forget anything of that kind. Perhaps you could pict up at my flat at some time that suited you? Wait. Let me give you mddress.'
They were standing in front of a telescreen. Somewhat absent-mindedl'Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covereotebook and a gold ink-pencil. Immediately beneath the telescreen, iuch a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of thnstrument could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, torut the page and handed it to Winston.
'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said. 'If not, my servant wilive you the dictionary.'
He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this timhere was no need to conceal. Nevertheless he carefully memorized what waritten on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole alonith a mass of other papers.
They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the mosthere was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have. It haeen contrived as a way of letting Winston know O'Brien's address. Thias necessary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible tiscover where anyone lived. There were no directories of any kind. 'Iou ever want to see me, this is where I can be found,' was what O'Briead been saying to him. Perhaps there would even be a message concealeomewhere in the dictionary. But at any rate, one thing was certain. Thonspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outedges of it.
He knew that sooner or later he would obey O'Brien's summons. Perhapomorrow, perhaps after a long delay--he was not certain. What waappening was only the working-out of a process that had started yeargo. The first step had been a secret, involuntary thought, the seconad been the opening of the diary. He had moved from thoughts to wordsnd now from words to actions. The last step was something that woulappen in the Ministry of Love. He had accepted it. The end was containen the beginning. But it was frightening: or, more exactly, it was lik foretaste of death, like being a little less alive. Even while he wapeaking to O'Brien, when the meaning of the words had sunk in, a chillhuddering feeling had taken possession of his body. He had the sensatiof stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was not much betteecause he had always known that the grave was there and waiting for him.
Chapter 7
Winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears. Julia rolled sleepilgainst him, murmuring something that might have been 'What's the matter?'
'I dreamt--' he began, and stopped short. It was too complex to be punto words. There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connecteith it that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking.
He lay back with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmosphere of thream. It was a vast, luminous dream in which his whole life seemed ttretch out before him like a landscape on a summer evening after raint had all occurred inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of thlass was the dome of the sky, and inside the dome everything was floodeith clear soft light in which one could see into interminable distanceshe dream had also been comprehended by--indeed, in some sense it haonsisted in--a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made agaihirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news filmrying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the helicoptelew them both to pieces.
'Do you know,' he said, 'that until this moment I believed I had murderey mother?'
'Why did you murder her?' said Julia, almost asleep.
'I didn't murder her. Not physically.'
In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and withi few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had alome back. It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out ois consciousness over many years. He was not certain of the date, but hould not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it haappened.
His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he coulot remember. He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances ohe time: the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tubtations, the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proclamationosted at street corners, the gangs of youths in shirts all the samolour, the enormous queues outside the bakeries, the intermittenachine-gun fire in the distance--above all, the fact that there waever enough to eat. He remembered long afternoons spent with other boyn scrounging round dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs oabbage leaves, potato peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrusrom which they carefully scraped away the cinders; and also in waitinor the passing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and wernown to carry cattle feed, and which, when they jolted over the baatches in the road, sometimes spilt a few fragments of oil-cake.
When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any surprise or aniolent grief, but a sudden change came over her. She seemed to havecome completely spiritless. It was evident even to Winston that she waaiting for something that she knew must happen. She did everything thaas needed--cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dustehe mantelpiece--always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluouotion, like an artist's lay-figure moving of its own accord. Her larghapely body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness. For hours at ime she would sit almost immobile on the bed, nursing his young sister tiny, ailing, very silent child of two or three, with a face made simiay thinness. Very occasionally she would take Winston in her arms anress him against her for a long time without saying anything. He waware, in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness, that this was somehoonnected with the never-mentioned thing that was about to happen.
He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close-smelling room thaeemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane. There was a gas rinn the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outsidhere was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms. He remembereis mother's statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at somethinn a saucepan. Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and thierce sordid battles at mealtimes. He would ask his mother nagginglyver and over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and stort her (he even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning treak prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he woulttempt a snivelling note of pathos in his efforts to get more than hihare. His mother was quite ready to give him more than his share. Shook it for granted that he, 'the boy', should have the biggest portionut however much she gave him he invariably demanded more. At every meahe would beseech him not to be selfish and to remember that his littlister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use. He would cry ouith rage when she stopped ladling, he would try to wrench the saucepand spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits from his sister's platee knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; hven felt that he had a right to do it. The clamorous hunger in his belleemed to justify him. Between meals, if his mother did not stand guarde was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf.
One day a chocolate ration was issued. There had been no such issue foeeks or months past. He remembered quite clearly that precious littlorsel of chocolate. It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked abouunces in those days) between the three of them. It was obvious that iught to be divided into three equal parts. Suddenly, as though he weristening to somebody else, Winston heard himself demanding in a louooming voice that he should be given the whole piece. His mother told hiot to be greedy. There was a long, nagging argument that went round anound, with shouts, whines, tears, remonstrances, bargainings. His tinister, clinging to her mother with both hands, exactly like a baby monkeyat looking over her shoulder at him with large, mournful eyes. In thnd his mother broke off three-quarters of the chocolate and gave it tinston, giving the other quarter to his sister. The little girl took holf it and looked at it dully, perhaps not knowing what it was. Winstotood watching her for a moment. Then with a sudden swift spring he hanatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister's hand and was fleeinor the door.
'Winston, Winston!' his mother called after him. 'Come back! Give youister back her chocolate!'
He stopped, but did not come back. His mother's anxious eyes were fixed ois face. Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what was that was on the point of happening. His sister, conscious of havineen robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail. His mother drew herm round the child and pressed its face against her breast. Something ihe gesture told him that his sister was dying. He turned and fled dowhe stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand.
He never saw his mother again. After he had devoured the chocolate he felomewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for severaours, until hunger drove him home. When he came back his mother haisappeared. This was already becoming normal at that time. Nothing waone from the room except his mother and his sister. They had not takeny clothes, not even his mother's overcoat. To this day he did not knoith any certainty that his mother was dead. It was perfectly possiblhat she had merely been sent to a forced-labour camp. As for his sisterhe might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonieor homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which harown up as a result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to thabour camp along with his mother, or simply left somewhere or otheo die.
The dream was still vivid in his mind, especially the enveloping protectinesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained. Hiind went back to another dream of two months ago. Exactly as his mothead sat on the dingy white-quilted bed, with the child clinging to her, she had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deepevery minute, but still looking up at him through the darkening water.
He told Julia the story of his mother's disappearance. Without opening heyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position.
'I expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,' she saindistinctly. 'All children are swine.'
'Yes. But the real point of the story----'
From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep againe would have liked to continue talking about his mother. He did nouppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusuaoman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind oobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyeere private ones. Her feelings were her own, and could not be altererom outside. It would not have occurred to her that an action which ineffectual thereby becomes meaningless. If you loved someone, you loveim, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love. Whehe last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child ier arms. It was no use, it changed nothing, it did not produce morhocolate, it did not avert the child's death or her own; but it seemeatural to her to do it. The refugee woman in the boat had also coverehe little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullethan a sheet of paper. The terrible thing that the Party had done was tersuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, whilt the same time robbing you of all power over the material world. Whence you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feelhat you did or refrained from doing, made literally no differencehatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were eveeard of again. You were lifted clean out of the stream of history. Anet to the people of only two generations ago this would not have seemell-important, because they were not attempting to alter history. Theere governed by private loyalties which they did not question. Whaattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesturen embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value itself. The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in thiondition. They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, theere loyal to one another. For the first time in his life he did noespise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which woulne day spring to life and regenerate the world. The proles had stayeuman. They had not become hardened inside. They had held on to thrimitive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effortnd in thinking this he remembered, without apparent relevance, how a feeeks ago he had seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had kicket into the gutter as though it had been a cabbage-stalk.
'The proles are human beings,' he said aloud. 'We are not human.'
'Why not?' said Julia, who had woken up again.
He thought for a little while. 'Has it ever occurred to you,' he saidthat the best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of herefore it's too late, and never see each other again?'
'Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times. But I'm not going to dt, all the same.'
'We've been lucky,' he said 'but it can't last much longer. You're youngou look normal and innocent. If you keep clear of people like me, yoight stay alive for another fifty years.'
'No. I've thought it all out. What you do, I'm going to do. And don't boo downhearted. I'm rather good at staying alive.'
'We may be together for another six months--a year--there's no knowingt the end we're certain to be apart. Do you realize how utterly alone whall be? When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literallothing, that either of us can do for the other. If I confess, they'lhoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they'll shoot you just the sameothing that I can do or say, or stop myself from saying, will put ofour death for as much as five minutes. Neither of us will even knohether the other is alive or dead. We shall be utterly without power ony kind. The one thing that matters is that we shouldn't betray onnother, although even that can't make the slightest difference.'
'If you mean confessing,' she said, 'we shall do that, right enoughverybody always confesses. You can't help it. They torture you.'
'I don't mean confessing. Confession is not betrayal. What you say or doesn't matter: only feelings matter. If they could make me stop lovinou--that would be the real betrayal.'
She thought it over. 'They can't do that,' she said finally. 'It's the onhing they can't do. They can make you say anything--ANYTHING--but thean't make you believe it. They can't get inside you.'
'No,' he said a little more hopefully, 'no; that's quite true. They can'et inside you. If you can FEEL that staying human is worth while, evehen it can't have any result whatever, you've beaten them.'
He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear. They could sppon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwihem. With all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret oinding out what another human being was thinking. Perhaps that was lesrue when you were actually in their hands. One did not know what happenenside the Ministry of Love, but it was possible to guess: tortures, drugselicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, graduaearing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioningacts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden. They could be tracked dowy enquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture. But if the objecas not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did it ultimatelake? They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could nolter them yourself, even if you wanted to. They could lay bare in thtmost detail everything that you had done or said or thought; but thnner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remainempregnable.
Chapter 8
They had done it, they had done it at last!
The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit. Thelescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the richness of the dark-blue carpeave one the impression of treading on velvet. At the far end of the roo'Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass oapers on either side of him. He had not bothered to look up when thervant showed Julia and Winston in.
Winston's heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would bble to speak. They had done it, they had done it at last, was all hould think. It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer follo arrive together; though it was true that they had come by differenoutes and only met on O'Brien's doorstep. But merely to walk into such lace needed an effort of the nerve. It was only on very rare occasionhat one saw inside the dwelling-places of the Inner Party, or eveenetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived. The wholtmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness overything, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, thilent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white-jacketeervants hurrying to and fro--everything was intimidating. Although he ha good pretext for coming here, he was haunted at every step by the feahat a black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corneremand his papers, and order him to get out. O'Brien's servant, howeverad admitted the two of them without demur. He was a small, dark-hairean in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionlesace which might have been that of a Chinese. The passage down which hed them was softly carpeted, with cream-papered walls and whitainscoting, all exquisitely clean. That too was intimidating. Winstoould not remember ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were norimy from the contact of human bodies.
O'Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studyint intently. His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line ohe nose, looked both formidable and intelligent. For perhaps twenteconds he sat without stirring. Then he pulled the speakwrite towardim and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries:
'Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestioontained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stonproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinerverheads stop end message.'
He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across thoundless carpet. A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have falleway from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer thasual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed. The terror thainston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinarmbarrassment. It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made tupid mistake. For what evidence had he in reality that O'Brien was anind of political conspirator? Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a singlquivocal remark: beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded o dream. He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come torrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia's presence was impossiblo explain. As O'Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strikim. He stopped, turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall. There wa sharp snap. The voice had stopped.
Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise. Even in the midsf his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold hiongue.
'You can turn it off!' he said.
'Yes,' said O'Brien, 'we can turn it off. We have that privilege.'
He was opposite them now. His solid form towered over the pair of themnd the expression on his face was still indecipherable. He was waitingomewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what? Even now it wauite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why had been interrupted. Nobody spoke. After the stopping of the telescreehe room seemed deadly silent. The seconds marched past, enormous. Witifficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O'Brien's. Theuddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginningf a smile. With his characteristic gesture O'Brien resettled hipectacles on his nose.
'Shall I say it, or will you?' he said.
'I will say it,' said Winston promptly. 'That thing is really turned off?'
'Yes, everything is turned off. We are alone.'
'We have come here because----'
He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness ois own motives. Since he did not in fact know what kind oelp he expected from O'Brien, it was not easy to say why had come here. He went on, conscious that what he was sayinust sound both feeble and pretentious:
'We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kind of secrerganization working against the Party, and that you are involved in ite want to join it and work for it. We are enemies of the Party. Wisbelieve in the principles of Ingsoc. We are thought-criminals. We arlso adulterers. I tell you this because we want to put ourselves at youercy. If you want us to incriminate ourselves in any other way, we aready.'
He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the dooad opened. Sure enough, the little yellow-faced servant had come iithout knocking. Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decantend glasses.
'Martin is one of us,' said O'Brien impassively. 'Bring the drinks oveere, Martin. Put them on the round table. Have we enough chairs? Thee may as well sit down and talk in comfort. Bring a chair for yourselfartin. This is business. You can stop being a servant for the next teinutes.'
The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with ervant-like air, the air of a valet enjoying a privilege. Winstoegarded him out of the corner of his eye. It struck him that the man'hole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dangerous trop his assumed personality even for a moment. O'Brien took the decantey the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red liquid. It arousen Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a wall or oarding--a vast bottle composed of electric lights which seemed to movp and down and pour its contents into a glass. Seen from the top thtuff looked almost black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a rubyt had a sour-sweet smell. He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at with frank curiosity.
'It is called wine,' said O'Brien with a faint smile. 'You will have reabout it in books, no doubt. Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I afraid.' His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: 'I think is fitting that we should begin by drinking a health. To our Leader: Tmmanuel Goldstein.'
Winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness. Wine was a thing had read and dreamed about. Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington'alf-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, thlden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts. For some reasoe had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, likhat of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxicating effect. Actuallyhen he came to swallow it, the stuff was distinctly disappointing. Thruth was that after years of gin-drinking he could barely taste it. Het down the empty glass.
'Then there is such a person as Goldstein?' he said.
'Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive. Where, I do not know.'
'And the conspiracy--the organization? Is it real? It is not simply anvention of the Thought Police?'
'No, it is real. The Brotherhood, we call it. You will never learn mucore about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it will come back to that presently.' He looked at his wrist-watch. 'It inwise even for members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen foore than half an hour. You ought not to have come here together, anou will have to leave separately. You, comrade'--he bowed his head tulia--'will leave first. We have about twenty minutes at our disposalou will understand that I must start by asking you certain questionsn general terms, what are you prepared to do?'
'Anything that we are capable of,' said Winston.
O'Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facininston. He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted thainston could speak for her. For a moment the lids flitted down over hiyes. He began asking his questions in a low, expressionless voice, ahough this were a routine, a sort of catechism, most of whose answerere known to him already.
'You are prepared to give your lives?'
'Yes.'
'You are prepared to commit murder?'
'Yes.'
'To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hundreds onnocent people?'
'Yes.'
'To betray your country to foreign powers?'
'Yes.'
'You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to corrupt the mindf children, to distribute habit-forming drugs, to encourage prostitutiono disseminate venereal diseases--to do anything which is likely to causemoralization and weaken the power of the Party?'
'Yes.'
'If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuricid in a child's face--are you prepared to do that?'
'Yes.'
'You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your lifs a waiter or a dock-worker?'
'Yes.'
'You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we order you to do so?'
'Yes.'
'You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one anothegain?'
'No!' broke in Julia.
It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before he answered. For oment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech. Hiongue worked soundlessly, forming the opening syllables first of one wordhen of the other, over and over again. Until he had said it, he did nonow which word he was going to say. 'No,' he said finally.
'You did well to tell me,' said O'Brien. 'It is necessary for us to knoverything.'
He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat morxpression in it:
'Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a differenerson? We may be obliged to give him a new identity. His face, hiovements, the shape of his hands, the colour of his hair--even his voicould be different. And you yourself might have become a different personur surgeons can alter people beyond recognition. Sometimes it iecessary. Sometimes we even amputate a limb.'
Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin'ongolian face. There were no scars that he could see. Julia had turned hade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O'Brieoldly. She murmured something that seemed to be assent.
'Good. Then that is settled.'
There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table. With a rathebsent-minded air O'Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himselfhen stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could thinetter standing. They were very good cigarettes, very thick anell-packed, with an unfamiliar silkiness in the paper. O'Brien looked ais wrist-watch again.
'You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,' he said. 'I shall switcn in a quarter of an hour. Take a good look at these comrades' faceefore you go. You will be seeing them again. I may not.'
Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man's dark eyelickered over their faces. There was not a trace of friendliness in hianner. He was memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest ihem, or appeared to feel none. It occurred to Winston that a synthetiace was perhaps incapable of changing its expression. Without speakinr giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the dooilently behind him. O'Brien was strolling up and down, one hand in thocket of his black overalls, the other holding his cigarette.
'You understand,' he said, 'that you will be fighting in the dark. Yoill always be in the dark. You will receive orders and you will obey themithout knowing why. Later I shall send you a book from which you wilearn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by whice shall destroy it. When you have read the book, you will be full memberf the Brotherhood. But between the general aims that we are fighting fond the immediate tasks of the moment, you will never know anything. ell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you whether iumbers a hundred members, or ten million. From your personal knowledgou will never be able to say that it numbers even as many as a dozen. Yoill have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time ahey disappear. As this was your first contact, it will be preserved. Wheou receive orders, they will come from me. If we find it necessary tommunicate with you, it will be through Martin. When you are finallaught, you will confess. That is unavoidable. But you will have verittle to confess, other than your own actions. You will not be able tetray more than a handful of unimportant people. Probably you will noven betray me. By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become ifferent person, with a different face.'
He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet. In spite of thulkiness of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements. Iame out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocketr manipulated a cigarette. More even than of strength, he gave ampression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony. Howeveuch in earnest he might be, he had nothing of the single-mindedness thaelongs to a fanatic. When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal diseasemputated limbs, and altered faces, it was with a faint air of persiflageThis is unavoidable,' his voice seemed to say; 'this is what we have goo do, unflinchingly. But this is not what we shall be doing when life iorth living again.' A wave of admiration, almost of worship, flowed ourom Winston towards O'Brien. For the moment he had forgotten the shadowigure of Goldstein. When you looked at O'Brien's powerful shoulders anis blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impossiblo believe that he could be defeated. There was no stratagem that he waot equal to, no danger that he could not foresee. Even Julia seemed te impressed. She had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently'Brien went on:
'You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood. No doubou have formed your own picture of it. You have imagined, probably, uge underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly in cellars, scribblinessages on walls, recognizing one another by codewords or by speciaovements of the hand. Nothing of the kind exists. The members of throtherhood have no way of recognizing one another, and it is impossiblor any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few othersoldstein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, coulot give them a complete list of members, or any information that woulead them to a complete list. No such list exists. The Brotherhood cannoe wiped out because it is not an organization in the ordinary senseothing holds it together except an idea which is indestructible. Yoill never have anything to sustain you, except the idea. You will get nomradeship and no encouragement. When finally you are caught, you wilet no help. We never help our members. At most, when it is absolutelecessary that someone should be silenced, we are occasionally able tmuggle a razor blade into a prisoner's cell. You will have to get useo living without results and without hope. You will work for a whileou will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die. Those arhe only results that you will ever see. There is no possibility that anerceptible change will happen within our own lifetime. We are the deadur only true life is in the future. We shall take part in it as handfulf dust and splinters of bone. But how far away that future may be, thers no knowing. It might be a thousand years. At present nothing is possiblxcept to extend the area of sanity little by little. We cannot acollectively. We can only spread our knowledge outwards from individual tndividual, generation after generation. In the face of the Thought Polichere is no other way.'
He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist-watch.
'It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,' he said to Julia. 'Waithe decanter is still half full.'
He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem.
'What shall it be this time?' he said, still with the same fainuggestion of irony. 'To the confusion of the Thought Police? To theath of Big Brother? To humanity? To the future?'
'To the past,' said Winston.
'The past is more important,' agreed O'Brien gravely.
They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go'Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flahite tablet which he told her to place on her tongue. It was importante said, not to go out smelling of wine: the lift attendants were verbservant. As soon as the door had shut behind her he appeared to forgeer existence. He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped.
'There are details to be settled,' he said. 'I assume that you have iding-place of some kind?'
Winston explained about the room over Mr Charrington's shop.
'That will do for the moment. Later we will arrange something else for yout is important to change one's hiding-place frequently. Meanwhile I shalend you a copy of THE BOOK'--even O'Brien, Winston noticed, seemed tronounce the words as though they were in italics--'Goldstein's book, yonderstand, as soon as possible. It may be some days before I can get holf one. There are not many in existence, as you can imagine. The Thougholice hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produchem. It makes very little difference. The book is indestructible. Ihe last copy were gone, we could reproduce it almost word for word. Dou carry a brief-case to work with you?' he added.
'As a rule, yes.'
'What is it like?'
'Black, very shabby. With two straps.'
'Black, two straps, very shabby--good. One day in the fairly neauture--I cannot give a date--one of the messages among your morning'ork will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for epeat. On the following day you will go to work without your brief-caset some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on thrm and say "I think you have dropped your brief-case." The one he giveou will contain a copy of Goldstein's book. You will return it withiourteen days.'
They were silent for a moment.
'There are a couple of minutes before you need go,' said O'Brien. 'Whall meet again--if we do meet again----'
Winston looked up at him. 'In the place where there is no darkness?e said hesitantly.
O'Brien nodded without appearance of surprise. 'In the place where thers no darkness,' he said, as though he had recognized the allusion. 'Ann the meantime, is there anything that you wish to say before you leaveny message? Any question?.'
Winston thought. There did not seem to be any further question that hanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-soundineneralities. Instead of anything directly connected with O'Brien or throtherhood, there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of thark bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little roover Mr Charrington's shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steengraving in its rosewood frame. Almost at random he said:
'Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins "Oranges and lemonsay the bells of St Clement's"?'
Again O'Brien nodded. With a sort of grave courtesy he completed thtanza:
  'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's When will you pay me? say the bells of Old Bailey When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch.'
'You knew the last line!' said Winston.
'Yes, I knew the last line. And now, I am afraid, it is time for you to gout wait. You had better let me give you one of these tablets.'
As Winston stood up O'Brien held out a hand. His powerful grip crushehe bones of Winston's palm. At the door Winston looked back, but O'Brieeemed already to be in process of putting him out of mind. He was waitinith his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen. Beyond hiinston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and thpeakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers. The incident walosed. Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O'Brien would be bact his interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party.
Chapter 9
Winston was gelatinous with fatigue. Gelatinous was the right word. It haome into his head spontaneously. His body seemed to have not only theakness of a jelly, but its translucency. He felt that if he held up hiand he would be able to see the light through it. All the blood anymph had been drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leavinnly a frail structure of nerves, bones, and skin. All sensations seemeo be magnified. His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickleis feet, even the opening and closing of a hand was an effort that madis joints creak.
He had worked more than ninety hours in five days. So had everyone else ihe Ministry. Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, narty work of any description, until tomorrow morning. He could spend siours in the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed. Slowly, iild afternoon sunshine, he walked up a dingy street in the directiof Mr Charrington's shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, burrationally convinced that this afternoon there was no danger of anyonnterfering with him. The heavy brief-case that he was carrying bumpegainst his knee at each step, sending a tingling sensation up and dowhe skin of his leg. Inside it was the book, which he had now had in hiossession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even looked at.
On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the speeches, thhouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworkshe rolling of drums and squealing of trumpets, the tramp of marching feethe grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planeshe booming of guns--after six days of this, when the great orgasm wauivering to its climax and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled unto such delirium that if the crowd could have got their hands on th,000 Eurasian war-criminals who were to be publicly hanged on the lasay of the proceedings, they would unquestionably have torn them tieces--at just this moment it had been announced that Oceania was nofter all at war with Eurasia. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Eurasias an ally.
There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place. Merelt became known, with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once, thaastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy. Winston was taking part in emonstration in one of the central London squares at the moment when iappened. It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners weruridly floodlit. The square was packed with several thousand peoplencluding a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of thpies. On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a smalean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull ovehich a few lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd. A littlumpelstiltskin figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of thicrophone with one hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bonrm, clawed the air menacingly above his head. His voice, made metallic bhe amplifiers, boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacreseportations, lootings, rapings, torture of prisoners, bombing oivilians, lying propaganda, unjust aggressions, broken treaties. It walmost impossible to listen to him without being first convinced and theaddened. At every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and thoice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rosncontrollably from thousands of throats. The most savage yells of alame from the schoolchildren. The speech had been proceeding for perhapwenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to the platform and a scrap oaper was slipped into the speaker's hand. He unrolled and read it withouausing in his speech. Nothing altered in his voice or manner, or in thontent of what he was saying, but suddenly the names were differentithout words said, a wave of understanding rippled through the crowdceania was at war with Eastasia! The next moment there was a tremendouommotion. The banners and posters with which the square was decorateere all wrong! Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them. It waabotage! The agents of Goldstein had been at work! There was a riotounterlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shrednd trampled underfoot. The Spies performed prodigies of activity ilambering over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered frohe chimneys. But within two or three minutes it was all over. The oratortill gripping the neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forwardis free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with his speechne minute more, and the feral roars of rage were again bursting from throwd. The Hate continued exactly as before, except that the target haeen changed.
The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker hawitched from one line to the other actually in midsentence, not onlithout a pause, but without even breaking the syntax. But at the momene had other things to preoccupy him. It was during the moment of disordehile the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did noee had tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'Excuse me, I think you'vropped your brief-case.' He took the brief-case abstractedly, withoupeaking. He knew that it would be days before he had an opportunity took inside it. The instant that the demonstration was over he wentraight to the Ministry of Truth, though the time was now nearlwenty-three hours. The entire staff of the Ministry had done likewisehe orders already issuing from the telescreen, recalling them to theiosts, were hardly necessary.
Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war witastasia. A large part of the political literature of five years was noompletely obsolete. Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, booksamphlets, films, sound-tracks, photographs--all had to be rectified aightning speed. Although no directive was ever issued, it was known thahe chiefs of the Department intended that within one week no referenco the war with Eurasia, or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain ixistence anywhere. The work was overwhelming, all the more so becaushe processes that it involved could not be called by their truames. Everyone in the Records Department worked eighteen hours in thwenty-four, with two three-hour snatches of sleep. Mattresses were broughp from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors: meals consisted oandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled round on trolleys by attendants frohe canteen. Each time that Winston broke off for one of his spells oleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, and each time that hrawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that another showef paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift, half-burying thpeakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job walways to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to workhat was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanicalften it was enough merely to substitute one name for another, but anetailed report of events demanded care and imagination. Even theographical knowledge that one needed in transferring the war from onart of the world to another was considerable.
By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wipinvery few minutes. It was like struggling with some crushing physical taskomething which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheleseurotically anxious to accomplish. In so far as he had time to remembet, he was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into thpeakwrite, every stroke of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie. He was anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should berfect. On the morning of the sixth day the dribble of cylinders sloweown. For as much as half an hour nothing came out of the tube; then onore cylinder, then nothing. Everywhere at about the same time the woras easing off. A deep and as it were secret sigh went through thepartment. A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had beechieved. It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentarvidence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened. At twelve hundred ias unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free tilomorrow morning. Winston, still carrying the brief-case containing thook, which had remained between his feet while he worked and under hiody while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and almost fell asleep iis bath, although the water was barely more than tepid.
With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair abovr Charrington's shop. He was tired, but not sleepy any longer. He openehe window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water fooffee. Julia would arrive presently: meanwhile there was the book. Hat down in the sluttish armchair and undid the straps of the brief-case.
A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on thover. The print also looked slightly irregular. The pages were worn ahe edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed througany hands. The inscription on the title-page ran:
  THE THEORY AND PRACTICE O OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVIS b Emmanuel Goldstein
Winston began reading:
Chapter gnorance is Strength
Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Agehere have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middlend the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have bornountless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as theittitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but thssential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormoupheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has alwayeasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibriumowever far it is pushed one way or the other.
The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable...
Winston stopped reading, chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that has reading, in comfort and safety. He was alone: no telescreen, no ear ahe keyhole, no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover thage with his hand. The sweet summer air played against his cheek. Froomewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of children: in the rootself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock. He settleeeper into the arm-chair and put his feet up on the fender. It was blisst was eternity. Suddenly, as one sometimes does with a book of which onnows that one will ultimately read and re-read every word, he opened it a different place and found himself at Chapter III. He went on reading:
Chapter IIar is Peace
The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an evenhich could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentietentury. With the absorption of Europe by Russia and of the British Empiry the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia anceania, were already effectively in being. The third, Eastasia, onlmerged as a distinct unit after another decade of confused fighting. Throntiers between the three super-states are in some places arbitrary, ann others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in generahey follow geographical lines. Eurasia comprises the whole of the northerart of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Berintrait. Oceania comprises the Americas, the Atlantic islands including thritish Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa. Eastasiamaller than the others and with a less definite western frontieromprises China and the countries to the south of it, the Japanese islandnd a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tibet.
In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently aar, and have been so for the past twenty-five years. War, however, is nonger the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the earlecades of the twentieth century. It is a warfare of limited aims betweeombatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material causor fighting and are not divided by any genuine ideological differencehis is not to say that either the conduct of war, or the prevailinttitude towards it, has become less bloodthirsty or more chivalrousn the contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countriesnd such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reductiof whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners whicxtend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normalnd, when they are committed by one's own side and not by the enemyeritorious. But in a physical sense war involves very small numbers oeople, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes comparatively feasualties. The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vagurontiers whose whereabouts the average man can only guess at, or rounhe Floating Fortresses which guard strategic spots on the sea lanes. Ihe centres of civilization war means no more than a continuous shortagf consumption goods, and the occasional crash of a rocket bomb which maause a few scores of deaths. War has in fact changed its character. Morxactly, the reasons for which war is waged have changed in their order omportance. Motives which were already present to some small extent in threat wars of the early twentieth century have now become dominant anre consciously recognized and acted upon.
To understand the nature of the present war--for in spite of the regroupinhich occurs every few years, it is always the same war--one must realizn the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive. None ohe three super-states could be definitively conquered even by the othewo in combination. They are too evenly matched, and their natural defencere too formidable. Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceaniy the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecunditnd industriousness of its inhabitants. Secondly, there is no longer, i material sense, anything to fight about. With the establishment oelf-contained economies, in which production and consumption are geareo one another, the scramble for markets which was a main cause orevious wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials no longer a matter of life and death. In any case each of the threuper-states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that needs within its own boundaries. In so far as the war has a direcconomic purpose, it is a war for labour power. Between the frontiers ohe super-states, and not permanently in the possession of any of themhere lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazzavillearwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the populatiof the earth. It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regionsnd of the northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantltruggling. In practice no one power ever controls the whole of thisputed area. Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is thhance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treacherhat dictates the endless changes of alignment.
All of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some ohem yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in coldelimates it is necessary to synthesize by comparatively expensive methodsut above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour. Whicheveower controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, oouthern India, or the Indonesian Archipelago, disposes also of the bodief scores or hundreds of millions of ill-paid and hard-working coolieshe inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly to the statuf slaves, pass continually from conqueror to conqueror, and are expendeike so much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capturore territory, to control more labour power, to turn out more armamentso capture more territory, and so on indefinitely. It should be noted thahe fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areashe frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congnd the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the Indiacean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured bceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia anastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim tnormous territories which in fact are largely uninhabited and unexploredut the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territorhich forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolateoreover, the labour of the exploited peoples round the Equator is noeally necessary to the world's economy. They add nothing to the wealth ohe world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, anhe object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in whico wage another war. By their labour the slave populations allow the tempf continuous warfare to be speeded up. But if they did not exist, thtructure of world society, and the process by which it maintains itselfould not be essentially different.
The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles oOUBLETHINK, this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized bhe directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of thachine without raising the general standard of living. Ever since the enf the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus oonsumption goods has been latent in industrial society. At present, wheew human beings even have enough to eat, this problem is obviously norgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artificial processef destruction had been at work. The world of today is a bare, hungryilapidated place compared with the world that existed before 1914, antill more so if compared with the imaginary future to which the people ohat period looked forward. In the early twentieth century, the vision o future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, and efficient--littering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow-white concrete--waart of the consciousness of nearly every literate person. Science anechnology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural tssume that they would go on developing. This failed to happen, partlecause of the impoverishment caused by a long series of wars anevolutions, partly because scientific and technical progress depended ohe empirical habit of thought, which could not survive in a strictlegimented society. As a whole the world is more primitive today than ias fifty years ago. Certain backward areas have advanced, and variouevices, always in some way connected with warfare and police espionageave been developed, but experiment and invention have largely stoppednd the ravages of the atomic war of the nineteen-fifties have never beeully repaired. Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are stilhere. From the moment when the machine first made its appearance ias clear to all thinking people that the need for human drudgery, anherefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared. If thachine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirtlliteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generationsnd in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort outomatic process--by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossiblot to distribute--the machine did raise the living standards of thverage human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years ahe end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries.
But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened thestruction--indeed, in some sense was the destruction--of a hierarchicaociety. In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough tat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possesse motor-car or even an aeroplane, the most obvious and perhaps the mosmportant form of inequality would already have disappeared. If it oncecame general, wealth would confer no distinction. It was possible, noubt, to imagine a society in which WEALTH, in the sense of personaossessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while POWEemained in the hands of a small privileged caste. But in practice suc society could not long remain stable. For if leisure and security wernjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normalltupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think fohemselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or lateealize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweet away. In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on asis of poverty and ignorance. To return to the agricultural past, aome thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed ooing, was not a practicable solution. It conflicted with the tendencowards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almoshe whole world, and moreover, any country which remained industriallackward was helpless in a military sense and was bound to be dominatedirectly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals.
Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty bestricting the output of goods. This happened to a great extent durinhe final phase of capitalism, roughly between 1920 and 1940. The economf many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivationapital equipment was not added to, great blocks of the population werrevented from working and kept half alive by State charity. But thisoo, entailed military weakness, and since the privations it inflicteere obviously unnecessary, it made opposition inevitable. The problem waow to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the reaealth of the world. Goods must be produced, but they must not bistributed. And in practice the only way of achieving this was bontinuous warfare.
The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human livesut of the products of human labour. War is a way of shattering to piecesr pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the seaaterials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortablend hence, in the long run, too intelligent. Even when weapons of war arot actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way oxpending labour power without producing anything that can be consumed Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up in it the labour thaould build several hundred cargo-ships. Ultimately it is scrapped absolete, never having brought any material benefit to anybody, and witurther enormous labours another Floating Fortress is built. In principlhe war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus that mighxist after meeting the bare needs of the population. In practice the needf the population are always underestimated, with the result that there i chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked os an advantage. It is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groupomewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcitncreases the importance of small privileges and thus magnifies thistinction between one group and another. By the standards of the earlwentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party lives an austereaborious kind of life. Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjois large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, thetter quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or threervants, his private motor-car or helicopter--set him in a different worlrom a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party hav similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we calthe proles'. The social atmosphere is that of a besieged city, where thossession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth anoverty. And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, anherefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small casteem the natural, unavoidable condition of survival.
War, it will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruction, buccomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way. In principle it woule quite simple to waste the surplus labour of the world by buildinemples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or evey producing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them. Buhis would provide only the economic and not the emotional basis for ierarchical society. What is concerned here is not the morale of masseshose attitude is unimportant so long as they are kept steadily at workut the morale of the Party itself. Even the humblest Party member ixpected to be competent, industrious, and even intelligent within narroimits, but it is also necessary that he should be a credulous and ignorananatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastiriumph. In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentalitppropriate to a state of war. It does not matter whether the war ictually happening, and, since no decisive victory is possible, it doeot matter whether the war is going well or badly. All that is needed ihat a state of war should exist. The splitting of the intelligence whiche Party requires of its members, and which is more easily achieved in atmosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the rankne goes, the more marked it becomes. It is precisely in the Inner Parthat war hysteria and hatred of the enemy are strongest. In his capacits an administrator, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Parto know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may oftee aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening os being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but sucnowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK. Meanwhilo Inner Party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief thahe war is real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceanihe undisputed master of the entire world.
All members of the Inner Party believe in this coming conquest as article of faith. It is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring mornd more territory and so building up an overwhelming preponderance oower, or by the discovery of some new and unanswerable weapon. The searcor new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaininctivities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find anutlet. In Oceania at the present day, Science, in the old sense, halmost ceased to exist. In Newspeak there is no word for 'Science'. Thmpirical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements ohe past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles ongsoc. And even technological progress only happens when its products can some way be used for the diminution of human liberty. In all the usefurts the world is either standing still or going backwards. The fields arultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery. Bun matters of vital importance--meaning, in effect, war and policspionage--the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at leasolerated. The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface ohe earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independenhought. There are therefore two great problems which the Party ioncerned to solve. One is how to discover, against his will, what anotheuman being is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundreillion people in a few seconds without giving warning beforehand. Io far as scientific research still continues, this is its subject matterhe scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitortudying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressionsestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects orugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; or he is chemisthysicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his speciaubject as are relevant to the taking of life. In the vast laboratorief the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in thrazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands ohe Antarctic, the teams of experts are indefatigably at work. Some aroncerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devisarger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and mornd more impenetrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlieases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities to destroy the vegetation of whole continents, or for breeds of diseaserms immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produc vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine undehe water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-shipthers explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun's rayhrough lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, oroducing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat ahe earth's centre.
But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near realization, and nonf the three super-states ever gains a significant lead on the othershat is more remarkable is that all three powers already possess, in thtomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their presenesearches are likely to discover. Although the Party, according to itabit, claims the invention for itself, atomic bombs first appeared aarly as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale abouen years later. At that time some hundreds of bombs were dropped ondustrial centres, chiefly in European Russia, Western Europe, anorth America. The effect was to convince the ruling groups of alountries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organizeociety, and hence of their own power. Thereafter, although no formagreement was ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped. All threowers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up againshe decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or laternd meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty oorty years. Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombinlanes have been largely superseded by self-propelled projectiles, and thragile movable battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable Floatinortress; but otherwise there has been little development. The tank, thubmarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hanrenade are still in use. And in spite of the endless slaughters reporten the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier warsn which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killen a few weeks, have never been repeated.
None of the three super-states ever attempts any manoeuvre which involvehe risk of serious defeat. When any large operation is undertaken, it isually a surprise attack against an ally. The strategy that all threowers are following, or pretend to themselves that they are followings the same. The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bargaining, anell-timed strokes of treachery, to acquire a ring of bases completelncircling one or other of the rival states, and then to sign a pact oriendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years to lull suspicion to sleep. During this time rockets loaded with atomiombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally they will ale fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliatiompossible. It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with themaining world-power, in preparation for another attack. This scheme, is hardly necessary to say, is a mere daydream, impossible of realizationoreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round thquator and the Pole: no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertakenhis explains the fact that in some places the frontiers between thuper-states are arbitrary. Eurasia, for example, could easily conquer thritish Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on the otheand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhinr even to the Vistula. But this would violate the principle, followed oll sides though never formulated, of cultural integrity. If Oceania wero conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, iould be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of greahysical difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundreillion people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly ohe Oceanic level. The problem is the same for all three super-statest is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be nontact with foreigners, except, to a limited extent, with war prisonernd coloured slaves. Even the official ally of the moment is alwayegarded with the darkest suspicion. War prisoners apart, the averagitizen of Oceania never sets eyes on a citizen of either Eurasia oastasia, and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages. If here allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they arreatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told abouhem is lies. The sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and thear, hatred, and self-righteousness on which his morale depends mighvaporate. It is therefore realized on all sides that however often Persiar Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the main frontiers musever be crossed by anything except bombs.
Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood ancted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-statere very much the same. In Oceania the prevailing philosophy is callengsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and in Eastasia it ialled by a Chinese name usually translated as Death-Worship, but perhapetter rendered as Obliteration of the Self. The citizen of Oceania is nollowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, bue is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality anommon sense. Actually the three philosophies are barely distinguishablend the social systems which they support are not distinguishable at allverywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the same worship oemi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuouarfare. It follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquene another, but would gain no advantage by doing so. On the contraryo long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up, like threheaves of corn. And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers arimultaneously aware and unaware of what they are doing. Their lives aredicated to world conquest, but they also know that it is necessary thahe war should continue everlastingly and without victory. Meanwhile thact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial oeality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems ohought. Here it is necessary to repeat what has been said earlier, thay becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed its character.
In past ages, a war, almost by definition, was something that sooner oater came to an end, usually in unmistakable victory or defeat. In thast, also, war was one of the main instruments by which human societieere kept in touch with physical reality. All rulers in all ages have trieo impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they coulot afford to encourage any illusion that tended to impair militarfficiency. So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some otheesult generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeaad to be serious. Physical facts could not be ignored. In philosophy, oeligion, or ethics, or politics, two and two might make five, but whene was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four. Inefficienations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle fofficiency was inimical to illusions. Moreover, to be efficient it waecessary to be able to learn from the past, which meant having a fairlccurate idea of what had happened in the past. Newspapers and historooks were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification ohe kind that is practised today would have been impossible. War was ure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concernet was probably the most important of all safeguards. While wars could bon or lost, no ruling class could be completely irresponsible.
But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangeroushen war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessityechnical progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied oisregarded. As we have seen, researches that could be called scientifire still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are essentially ind of daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not importantfficiency, even military efficiency, is no longer needed. Nothing ifficient in Oceania except the Thought Police. Since each of the threuper-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe withihich almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised. Realitnly exerts its pressure through the needs of everyday life--the need tat and drink, to get shelter and clothing, to avoid swallowing poison otepping out of top-storey windows, and the like. Between life and deathnd between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still istinction, but that is all. Cut off from contact with the outer worldnd with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellapace, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is downhe rulers of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesarould not be. They are obliged to prevent their followers from starvino death in numbers large enough to be inconvenient, and they are obligeo remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals; bunce that minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shaphey choose.
The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of previous wars, ierely an imposture. It is like the battles between certain ruminannimals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable ourting one another. But though it is unreal it is not meaningless. Iats up the surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve thpecial mental atmosphere that a hierarchical society needs. War, it wile seen, is now a purely internal affair. In the past, the ruling groupf all countries, although they might recognize their common interest anherefore limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one anothernd the victor always plundered the vanquished. In our own day they arot fighting against one another at all. The war is waged by each rulinroup against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to makr prevent conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of societntact. The very word 'war', therefore, has become misleading. It woulrobably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased txist. The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between theolithic Age and the early twentieth century has disappeared and beeeplaced by something quite different. The effect would be much the samf the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, should agreo live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries. Fon that case each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for everom the sobering influence of external danger. A peace that was trulermanent would be the same as a permanent war. This--although the vasajority of Party members understand it only in a shallower sense--is thnner meaning of the Party slogan: WAR IS PEACE.
Winston stopped reading for a moment. Somewhere in remote distance ocket bomb thundered. The blissful feeling of being alone with thorbidden book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off. Solitudnd safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tirednesf his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze frohe window that played upon his cheek. The book fascinated him, or morxactly it reassured him. In a sense it told him nothing that was new, buhat was part of the attraction. It said what he would have said, if iad been possible for him to set his scattered thoughts in order. It wahe product of a mind similar to his own, but enormously more powerfulore systematic, less fear-ridden. The best books, he perceived, are thoshat tell you what you know already. He had just turned back to Chapter hen he heard Julia's footstep on the stair and started out of his chaio meet her. She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung herselnto his arms. It was more than a week since they had seen one another.
'I've got THE BOOK,' he said as they disentangled themselves.
'Oh, you've got it? Good,' she said without much interest, and almosmmediately knelt down beside the oil stove to make the coffee.
They did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half aour. The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull uhe counterpane. From below came the familiar sound of singing and thcrape of boots on the flagstones. The brawny red-armed woman whom Winstoad seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard. Thereemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fretween the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clotheegs and breaking forth into lusty song. Julia had settled down on heide and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep. He reacheut for the book, which was lying on the floor, and sat up against thedhead.
'We must read it,' he said. 'You too. All members of the Brotherhood havo read it.'
'You read it,' she said with her eyes shut. 'Read it aloud. That's thest way. Then you can explain it to me as you go.'
The clock's hands said six, meaning eighteen. They had three or four hourhead of them. He propped the book against his knees and began reading:
Chapter gnorance is Strength
Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Agehere have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middlend the Low. They have been subdivided in many ways, they have bornountless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as theittitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but thssential structure of society has never altered. Even after enormoupheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has alwayeasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibriumowever far it is pushed one way or the other
'Julia, are you awake?' said Winston.
'Yes, my love, I'm listening. Go on. It's marvellous.'
He continued reading:
The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable. The aim ohe High is to remain where they are. The aim of the Middle is to changlaces with the High. The aim of the Low, when they have an aim--for is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much crushey drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outsidheir daily lives--is to abolish all distinctions and create a society ihich all men shall be equal. Thus throughout history a struggle which ihe same in its main outlines recurs over and over again. For long periodhe High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later there alwayomes a moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or theiapacity to govern efficiently, or both. They are then overthrown by thiddle, who enlist the Low on their side by pretending to them that there fighting for liberty and justice. As soon as they have reached theibjective, the Middle thrust the Low back into their old position oervitude, and themselves become the High. Presently a new Middle grouplits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and thtruggle begins over again. Of the three groups, only the Low are neveven temporarily successful in achieving their aims. It would be axaggeration to say that throughout history there has been no progress o material kind. Even today, in a period of decline, the average humaeing is physically better off than he was a few centuries ago. But ndvance in wealth, no softening of manners, no reform or revolution haver brought human equality a millimetre nearer. From the point of view ohe Low, no historic change has ever meant much more than a change in thame of their masters.
By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pattern had becombvious to many observers. There then rose schools of thinkers whnterpreted history as a cyclical process and claimed to show thanequality was the unalterable law of human life. This doctrine, of coursead always had its adherents, but in the manner in which it was now puorward there was a significant change. In the past the need for ierarchical form of society had been the doctrine specifically of thigh. It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priestsawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generalleen softened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond thrave. The Middle, so long as it was struggling for power, had always madse of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity. Now, however, thoncept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were noet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long. In thast the Middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality, anhen had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrownhe new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehandocialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and wahe last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellionf antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past agesut in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards thim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openlbandoned. The new movements which appeared in the middle years of thentury, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, at is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuatinNfreedom and INequality. These new movements, of course, grew out of thld ones and tended to keep their names and pay lip-service to theideology. But the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress and freezistory at a chosen moment. The familiar pendulum swing was to happen oncore, and then stop. As usual, the High were to be turned out by thiddle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscioutrategy, the High would be able to maintain their position permanently.
The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historicanowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existeefore the nineteenth century. The cyclical movement of history was nontelligible, or appeared to be so; and if it was intelligible, then ias alterable. But the principal, underlying cause was that, as earls the beginning of the twentieth century, human equality had becomechnically possible. It was still true that men were not equal in theiative talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways thaavoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any reaeed for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth. In earlieges, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirablenequality was the price of civilization. With the development of machinroduction, however, the case was altered. Even if it was still necessaror human beings to do different kinds of work, it was no longer necessaror them to live at different social or economic levels. Therefore, frohe point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing poweruman equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger te averted. In more primitive ages, when a just and peaceful society wan fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it. The idea on earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state orotherhood, without laws and without brute labour, had haunted the humamagination for thousands of years. And this vision had had a certain holven on the groups who actually profited by each historical change. Theirs of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believen their own phrases about the rights of man, freedom of speech, equalitefore the law, and the like, and have even allowed their conduct to bnfluenced by them to some extent. But by the fourth decade of thwentieth century all the main currents of political thought weruthoritarian. The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly thoment when it became realizable. Every new political theory, by whateveame it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation. And in theneral hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices whicad been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years--imprisonmenithout trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executionsorture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportatiof whole populations--not only became common again, but were toleratend even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened anrogressive.
It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, anounter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivalmerged as fully worked-out political theories. But they had beeoreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, whicad appeared earlier in the century, and the main outlines of the worlhich would emerge from the prevailing chaos had long been obvious. Whaind of people would control this world had been equally obvious. The neristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientistsechnicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologistseachers, journalists, and professional politicians. These people, whosrigins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of thorking class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world oonopoly industry and centralized government. As compared with theipposite numbers in past ages, they were less avaricious, less tempted buxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of whahey were doing and more intent on crushing opposition. This lasifference was cardinal. By comparison with that existing today, all thyrannies of the past were half-hearted and inefficient. The ruling groupere always infected to some extent by liberal ideas, and were content teave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to bninterested in what their subjects were thinking. Even the Catholic Churcf the Middle Ages was tolerant by modern standards. Part of the reasoor this was that in the past no government had the power to keep ititizens under constant surveillance. The invention of print, howeverade it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radiarried the process further. With the development of television, anhe technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmiimultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end. Everitizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watchingould be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the policnd in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels oommunication closed. The possibility of enforcing not only completbedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion all subjects, now existed for the first time.
After the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties, societegrouped itself, as always, into High, Middle, and Low. But the new Higroup, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew whaas needed to safeguard its position. It had long been realized that thnly secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism. Wealth and privilegre most easily defended when they are possessed jointly. The so-calleabolition of private property' which took place in the middle years ohe century meant, in effect, the concentration of property in far feweands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were roup instead of a mass of individuals. Individually, no member of tharty owns anything, except petty personal belongings. Collectively, tharty owns everything in Oceania, because it controls everything, anisposes of the products as it thinks fit. In the years following thevolution it was able to step into this commanding position almosnopposed, because the whole process was represented as an act oollectivization. It had always been assumed that if the capitalist clasere expropriated, Socialism must follow: and unquestionably thapitalists had been expropriated. Factories, mines, land, housesransport--everything had been taken away from them: and since theshings were no longer private property, it followed that they must bublic property. Ingsoc, which grew out of the earlier Socialist movemennd inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the main item ihe Socialist programme; with the result, foreseen and intended beforehandhat economic inequality has been made permanent.
But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper thahis. There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from powerither it is conquered from without, or it governs so inefficiently thahe masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontenteiddle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence anillingness to govern. These causes do not operate singly, and as a rulll four of them are present in some degree. A ruling class which couluard against all of them would remain in power permanently. Ultimatelhe determining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself.
After the middle of the present century, the first danger had in realitisappeared. Each of the three powers which now divide the world is iact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through sloemographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily averthe second danger, also, is only a theoretical one. The masses neveevolt of their own accord, and they never revolt merely because they arppressed. Indeed, so long as they are not permitted to have standards oomparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed. Thecurrent economic crises of past times were totally unnecessary and arot now permitted to happen, but other and equally large dislocationan and do happen without having political results, because there is nay in which discontent can become articulate. As for the problem over-production, which has been latent in our society since the developmenf machine technique, it is solved by the device of continuous warfarsee Chapter III), which is also useful in keying up public morale to thecessary pitch. From the point of view of our present rulers, thereforehe only genuine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of ablender-employed, power-hungry people, and the growth of liberalism ancepticism in their own ranks. The problem, that is to say, is educationalt is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of thirecting group and of the larger executive group that lies immediatelelow it. The consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced i negative way.
Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it alreadyhe general structure of Oceanic society. At the apex of the pyramid comeig Brother. Big Brother is infallible and all-powerful. Every successvery achievement, every victory, every scientific discovery, alnowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issuirectly from his leadership and inspiration. Nobody has ever seen Birother. He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the telescreen. Way be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is alreadonsiderable uncertainty as to when he was born. Big Brother is the guisn which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world. His function io act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions whicre more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organizationelow Big Brother comes the Inner Party. Its numbers limited to siillions, or something less than 2 per cent of the population of Oceaniaelow the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party iescribed as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the handselow that come the dumb masses whom we habitually refer to as 'throles', numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the population. In the termf our earlier classification, the proles are the Low: for the slavopulation of the equatorial lands who pass constantly from conqueroo conqueror, are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure.
In principle, membership of these three groups is not hereditary. Thhild of Inner Party parents is in theory not born into the Inner Partydmission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at thge of sixteen. Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any markeomination of one province by another. Jews, Negroes, South Americans oure Indian blood are to be found in the highest ranks of the Party, anhe administrators of any area are always drawn from the inhabitants ohat area. In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling thahey are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital. Oceania hao capital, and its titular head is a person whose whereabouts nobodnows. Except that English is its chief LINGUA FRANCA and Newspeak itfficial language, it is not centralized in any way. Its rulers are noeld together by blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine. It irue that our society is stratified, and very rigidly stratified, on what first sight appear to be hereditary lines. There is far less to-and-frovement between the different groups than happened under capitalism oven in the pre-industrial age. Between the two branches of the Parthere is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensurhat weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitiouembers of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to riseroletarians, in practice, are not allowed to graduate into the Party. Thost gifted among them, who might possibly become nuclei of discontentre simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated. But thitate of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is it a matter orinciple. The Party is not a class in the old sense of the word. It doeot aim at transmitting power to its own children, as such; and if therere no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would berfectly prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks ohe proletariat. In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not ereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition. The older kinf Socialist, who had been trained to fight against something calleclass privilege' assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanente did not see that the continuity of an oligarchy need not be physicalor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always beehortlived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Churcave sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of years. The essence oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence o certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upohe living. A ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominatts successors. The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood buith perpetuating itself. WHO wields power is not important, provided thahe hierarchical structure remains always the same.
All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes thaharacterize our time are really designed to sustain the mystique ohe Party and prevent the true nature of present-day society from beinerceived. Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellions at present not possible. From the proletarians nothing is to be fearedeft to themselves, they will continue from generation to generation anrom century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only withouny impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the worlould be other than it is. They could only become dangerous if the advancf industrial technique made it necessary to educate them more highlyut, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, thevel of popular education is actually declining. What opinions the masseold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference. They cae granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect. In a Partember, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion ohe most unimportant subject can be tolerated.
A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thougholice. Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is aloneherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or resting, in his bath or ied, he can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he ieing inspected. Nothing that he does is indifferent. His friendships, hielaxations, his behaviour towards his wife and children, the expressiof his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even thharacteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized. Nonly any actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, anhange of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptof an inner struggle, is certain to be detected. He has no freedom ohoice in any direction whatever. On the other hand his actions are noegulated by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour. In Oceanihere is no law. Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certaieath are not formally forbidden, and the endless purges, arrestsortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishmenor crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely thiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in thuture. A Party member is required to have not only the right opinionsut the right instincts. Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of hire never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare thontradictions inherent in Ingsoc. If he is a person naturally orthodoin Newspeak a GOODTHINKER), he will in all circumstances know, withouaking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion. But iny case an elaborate mental training, undergone in childhood and groupintself round the Newspeak words CRIMESTOP, BLACKWHITE, and DOUBLETHINKakes him unwilling and unable to think too deeply on any subject whatever.
A Party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respiterom enthusiasm. He is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatref foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph over victories, anelf-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party. The discontentroduced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwardnd dissipated by such devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and thpeculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or rebellious attitudre killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline. The firsnd simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to younhildren, is called, in Newspeak, CRIMESTOP. CRIMESTOP means the facultf stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerouhought. It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing terceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments ihey are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any traif thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction. CRIMESTOPn short, means protective stupidity. But stupidity is not enough. On thontrary, orthodoxy in the full sense demands a control over one's owental processes as complete as that of a contortionist over his bodyceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother imnipotent and that the Party is infallible. But since in reality Birother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is neeor an unwearying, moment-to-moment flexibility in the treatment of factshe keyword here is BLACKWHITE. Like so many Newspeak words, this word hawo mutually contradictory meanings. Applied to an opponent, it means thabit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of thlain facts. Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness tay that black is white when Party discipline demands this. But it meanlso the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW thalack is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contraryhis demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by thystem of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known Newspeak as DOUBLETHINK.
The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which iubsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary. The subsidiary reason is thahe Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditionartly because he has no standards of comparison. He must be cut off frohe past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it iecessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors anhat the average level of material comfort is constantly rising. But bar the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is theed to safeguard the infallibility of the Party. It is not merely thapeeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be constantly broughp to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were ill cases right. It is also that no change in doctrine or in politicalignment can ever be admitted. For to change one's mind, or even one'olicy, is a confession of weakness. If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasiwhichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must alwayave been the enemy. And if the facts say otherwise then the facts muse altered. Thus history is continuously rewritten. This day-to-daalsification of the past, carried out by the Ministry of Truth, is aecessary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression anspionage carried out by the Ministry of Love.
The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc. Past eventst is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in writteecords and in human memories. The past is whatever the records and themories agree upon. And since the Party is in full control of all recordnd in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows thahe past is whatever the Party chooses to make it. It also follows thahough the past is alterable, it never has been altered in any specifinstance. For when it has been recreated in whatever shape is needed ahe moment, then this new version IS the past, and no different past caver have existed. This holds good even when, as often happens, the samvent has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course o year. At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, anlearly the absolute can never have been different from what it is nowt will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on thraining of memory. To make sure that all written records agree withe orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act. But it is alsecessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner. And it is necessary to rearrange one's memories or to tamper with writteecords, then it is necessary to FORGET that one has done so. The trick ooing this can be learned like any other mental technique. It is learney the majority of Party members, and certainly by all who are intelligens well as orthodox. In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, 'realitontrol'. In Newspeak it is called DOUBLETHINK, though DOUBLETHINomprises much else as well.
DOUBLETHINK means the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one'ind simultaneously, and accepting both of them. The Party intellectuanows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knowhat he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of DOUBLETHINe also satisfies himself that reality is not violated. The process has te conscious, or it would not be carried out with sufficient precisionut it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling oalsity and hence of guilt. DOUBLETHINK lies at the very heart of Ingsocince the essential act of the Party is to use conscious deception whiletaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty. To teleliberate lies while genuinely believing in them, to forget any fact thaas become inconvenient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, traw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny thxistence of objective reality and all the while to take account of theality which one denies--all this is indispensably necessary. Even ising the word DOUBLETHINK it is necessary to exercise DOUBLETHINK. Foy using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by resh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitelyith the lie always one leap ahead of the truth. Ultimately it is by meanf DOUBLETHINK that the Party has been able--and may, for all we knowontinue to be able for thousands of years--to arrest the course oistory.
All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossifier because they grew soft. Either they became stupid and arrogant, faileo adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown; ohey became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should havsed force, and once again were overthrown. They fell, that is to sayither through consciousness or through unconsciousness. It is thchievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in whicoth conditions can exist simultaneously. And upon no other intellectuaasis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent. If one is to rulend to continue ruling, one must be able to dislocate the sense of realityor the secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one's ownfallibility with the Power to learn from past mistakes.
It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of DOUBLETHINK arhose who invented DOUBLETHINK and know that it is a vast system of mentaheating. In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what iappening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it isn general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion; thore intelligent, the less sane. One clear illustration of this is thact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in the sociacale. Those whose attitude towards the war is most nearly rational arhe subject peoples of the disputed territories. To these people the was simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodieike a tidal wave. Which side is winning is a matter of completndifference to them. They are aware that a change of overlordship meanimply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters whreat them in the same manner as the old ones. The slightly more favoureorkers whom we call 'the proles' are only intermittently conscious of thar. When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear anatred, but when left to themselves they are capable of forgetting foong periods that the war is happening. It is in the ranks of the Partynd above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is foundorld-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to bmpossible. This peculiar linking-together of opposites--knowledge witgnorance, cynicism with fanaticism--is one of the chief distinguishinarks of Oceanic society. The official ideology abounds with contradictionven when there is no practical reason for them. Thus, the Party rejectnd vilifies every principle for which the Socialist movement originalltood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism. It preache contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and iresses its members in a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manuaorkers and was adopted for that reason. It systematically undermines tholidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is irect appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty. Even the names of thour Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence iheir deliberate reversal of the facts. The Ministry of Peace concerntself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Lovith torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation. Thesontradictions are not accidental, nor do they result from ordinarypocrisy; they are deliberate exercises in DOUBLETHINK. For it is only reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitelyn no other way could the ancient cycle be broken. If human equality io be for ever averted--if the High, as we have called them, are to keeheir places permanently--then the prevailing mental condition must bontrolled insanity.
But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignoredt is; WHY should human equality be averted? Supposing that the mechanicf the process have been rightly described, what is the motive for thiuge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular momenf time?
Here we reach the central secret. As we have seen. the mystique of tharty, and above all of the Inner Party, depends upon DOUBLETHINK Bueeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinchat first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, thhought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other necessararaphernalia into existence afterwards. This motive really consists...
Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. Ieemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past. She waying on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowen her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes. Her breast rosnd fell slowly and regularly.
'Julia.'
No answer.
'Julia, are you awake?'
No answer. She was asleep. He shut the book, put it carefully on the flooray down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them.
He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret. He understooOW; he did not understand WHY. Chapter I, like Chapter III, had noctually told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematizehe knowledge that he possessed already. But after reading it he kneetter than before that he was not mad. Being in a minority, even inority of one, did not make you mad. There was truth and there wantruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, yoere not mad. A yellow beam from the sinking sun slanted in through thindow and fell across the pillow. He shut his eyes. The sun on his facnd the girl's smooth body touching his own gave him a strong, sleepyonfident feeling. He was safe, everything was all right. He fell asleeurmuring 'Sanity is not statistical,' with the feeling that this remarontained in it a profound wisdom.
*****
When he woke it was with the sensation of having slept for a long timeut a glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was onlwenty-thirty. He lay dozing for a while; then the usual deep-lungeinging struck up from the yard below:
  'It was only an 'opeless fancy It passed like an Ipril dye But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirre They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!'
The drivelling song seemed to have kept its popularity. You still heard ill over the place. It had outlived the Hate Song. Julia woke at thound, stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed.
'I'm hungry,' she said. 'Let's make some more coffee. Damn! The stove'one out and the water's cold.' She picked the stove up and shook itThere's no oil in it.'
'We can get some from old Charrington, I expect.'
'The funny thing is I made sure it was full. I'm going to put my clothen,' she added. 'It seems to have got colder.'
Winston also got up and dressed himself. The indefatigable voice sang on:
  'They sye that time 'eals all things They sye you can always forget But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the year They twist my 'eart-strings yet!'
As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the windowhe sun must have gone down behind the houses; it was not shining into thard any longer. The flagstones were wet as though they had just beeashed, and he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresnd pale was the blue between the chimney-pots. Tirelessly the womaarched to and fro, corking and uncorking herself, singing and fallinilent, and pegging out more diapers, and more and yet more. He wonderehether she took in washing for a living or was merely the slave of twentr thirty grandchildren. Julia had come across to his side; together theazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure below. As hooked at the woman in her characteristic attitude, her thick arms reachinp for the line, her powerful mare-like buttocks protruded, it struck hior the first time that she was beautiful. It had never before occurred tim that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions bhildbearing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in thrain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful. But it was so, anfter all, he thought, why not? The solid, contourless body, like a blocf granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same relation to the bodf a girl as the rose-hip to the rose. Why should the fruit be helnferior to the flower?
'She's beautiful,' he murmured.
'She's a metre across the hips, easily,' said Julia.
'That is her style of beauty,' said Winston.
He held Julia's supple waist easily encircled by his arm. From the hip the knee her flank was against his. Out of their bodies no child woulver come. That was the one thing they could never do. Only by word oouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret. The woman dowhere had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertilelly. He wondered how many children she had given birth to. It mighasily be fifteen. She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhapsf wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilizeruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had beeaundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweeping, polishing, mendingcrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, ovehirty unbroken years. At the end of it she was still singing. The mysticaeverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the aspect ohe pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney-pots intnterminable distance. It was curious to think that the sky was the samor everybody, in Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here. And the peoplnder the sky were also very much the same--everywhere, all over the worldundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignoranf one another's existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, anet almost exactly the same--people who had never learned to think but where storing up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power thaould one day overturn the world. If there was hope, it lay in the prolesithout having read to the end of THE BOOK, he knew that that must boldstein's final message. The future belonged to the proles. And could he sure that when their time came the world they constructed would not bust as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? Yesecause at the least it would be a world of sanity. Where there iquality there can be sanity. Sooner or later it would happen, strengtould change into consciousness. The proles were immortal, you could nooubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard. In the enheir awakening would come. And until that happened, though it might be housand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birdsassing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not sharnd could not kill.
'Do you remember,' he said, 'the thrush that sang to us, that first dayt the edge of the wood?'
'He wasn't singing to us,' said Julia. 'He was singing to please himselfot even that. He was just singing.'
The birds sang, the proles sang. the Party did not sing. All round thorld, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysteriousorbidden lands beyond the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlinn the villages of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China anapan--everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrouy work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singingut of those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day comeou were the dead, theirs was the future. But you could share in thauture if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passen the secret doctrine that two plus two make four.
'We are the dead,' he said.
'We are the dead,' echoed Julia dutifully.
'You are the dead,' said an iron voice behind them.
They sprang apart. Winston's entrails seemed to have turned into ice. Hould see the white all round the irises of Julia's eyes. Her face haurned a milky yellow. The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbontood out sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath.
'You are the dead,' repeated the iron voice.
'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia.
'It was behind the picture,' said the voice. 'Remain exactly where yore. Make no movement until you are ordered.'
It was starting, it was starting at last! They could do nothing exceptand gazing into one another's eyes. To run for life, to get out of thouse before it was too late--no such thought occurred to them. Unthinkablo disobey the iron voice from the wall. There was a snap as though a catcad been turned back, and a crash of breaking glass. The picture had falleo the floor uncovering the telescreen behind it.
'Now they can see us,' said Julia.
'Now we can see you,' said the voice. 'Stand out in the middle of thoom. Stand back to back. Clasp your hands behind your heads. Do not toucne another.'
They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia'ody shaking. Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own. He coulust stop his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his controlhere was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outsidehe yard seemed to be full of men. Something was being dragged across thtones. The woman's singing had stopped abruptly. There was a long, rollinlang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then onfusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain.
'The house is surrounded,' said Winston.
'The house is surrounded,' said the voice.
He heard Julia snap her teeth together. 'I suppose we may as well saood-bye,' she said.
'You may as well say good-bye,' said the voice. And then another quitifferent voice, a thin, cultivated voice which Winston had the impressiof having heard before, struck in; 'And by the way, while we are on thubject, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper thop off your head"!'
Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston's back. The head of a laddead been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame. Someone walimbing through the window. There was a stampede of boots up the stairshe room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots oheir feet and truncheons in their hands.
Winston was not trembling any longer. Even his eyes he barely moved. Onhing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give them axcuse to hit you! A man with a smooth prize-fighter's jowl in which thouth was only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheoeditatively between thumb and forefinger. Winston met his eyes. Theeling of nakedness, with one's hands behind one's head and one's facnd body all exposed, was almost unbearable. The man protruded the tif a white tongue, licked the place where his lips should have been, anhen passed on. There was another crash. Someone had picked up the glasaperweight from the table and smashed it to pieces on the hearth-stone.
The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rosebud fro cake, rolled across the mat. How small, thought Winston, how small ilways was! There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received iolent kick on the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance. One ohe men had smashed his fist into Julia's solar plexus, doubling her uike a pocket ruler. She was thrashing about on the floor, fighting foreath. Winston dared not turn his head even by a millimetre, but sometimeer livid, gasping face came within the angle of his vision. Even in hierror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadlain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back hereath. He knew what it was like; the terrible, agonizing pain which wahere all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all elst was necessary to be able to breathe. Then two of the men hoisted hep by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room like a sackinston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yellow and contorted, withe eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek; and thaas the last he saw of her.
He stood dead still. No one had hit him yet. Thoughts which came of theiwn accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through hiind. He wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington. He wondered whahey had done to the woman in the yard. He noticed that he badly wanteo urinate, and felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two ohree hours ago. He noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nineeaning twenty-one. But the light seemed too strong. Would not the lighe fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening? He wondered whethefter all he and Julia had mistaken the time--had slept the clock rounnd thought it was twenty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirtn the following morning. But he did not pursue the thought furthert was not interesting.
There was another, lighter step in the passage. Mr Charrington came inthe room. The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became morubdued. Something had also changed in Mr Charrington's appearance. Hiye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight.
'Pick up those pieces,' he said sharply.
A man stooped to obey. The cockney accent had disappeared; Winston suddenlealized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on thelescreen. Mr Charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, buis hair, which had been almost white, had turned black. Also he was noearing his spectacles. He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as thougerifying his identity, and then paid no more attention to him. He watill recognizable, but he was not the same person any longer. His bodad straightened, and seemed to have grown bigger. His face had undergonnly tiny changes that had nevertheless worked a complete transformationhe black eyebrows were less bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the wholines of the face seemed to have altered; even the nose seemed shorter. Ias the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty. It occurred tinston that for the first time in his life he was looking, with knowledget a member of the Thought Police.
PART THREE
Chapter 1
He did not know where he was. Presumably he was in the Ministry of Loveut there was no way of making certain. He was in a high-ceilingeindowless cell with walls of glittering white porcelain. Concealed lamplooded it with cold light, and there was a low, steady humming sounhich he supposed had something to do with the air supply. A bench, ohelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by thoor and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no woodeeat. There were four telescreens, one in each wall.
There was a dull aching in his belly. It had been there ever since thead bundled him into the closed van and driven him away. But he was alsungry, with a gnawing, unwholesome kind of hunger. It might be twenty-fouours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. He still did not knowrobably never would know, whether it had been morning or evening whehey arrested him. Since he was arrested he had not been fed.
He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossen his knee. He had already learned to sit still. If you made unexpecteovements they yelled at you from the telescreen. But the craving for fooas growing upon him. What he longed for above all was a piece of breade had an idea that there were a few breadcrumbs in the pocket of hiveralls. It was even possible--he thought this because from time to timomething seemed to tickle his leg--that there might be a sizeable bit orust there. In the end the temptation to find out overcame his fear; hlipped a hand into his pocket.
'Smith!' yelled a voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Hands out oockets in the cells!'
He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee. Before being broughere he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinarrison or a temporary lock-up used by the patrols. He did not know hoong he had been there; some hours at any rate; with no clocks and naylight it was hard to gauge the time. It was a noisy, evil-smellinlace. They had put him into a cell similar to the one he was now inut filthily dirty and at all times crowded by ten or fifteen people. Thajority of them were common criminals, but there were a few politicarisoners among them. He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirtodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take mucnterest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing differencn demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others. The Partrisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordinary criminaleemed to care nothing for anybody. They yelled insults at the guardsought back fiercely when their belongings were impounded, wrote obscenords on the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysteriouiding-places in their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen whet tried to restore order. On the other hand some of them seemed to be oood terms with the guards, called them by nicknames, and tried to wheedligarettes through the spyhole in the door. The guards, too, treated thommon criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handlhem roughly. There was much talk about the forced-labour camps to whicost of the prisoners expected to be sent. It was 'all right' in thamps, he gathered, so long as you had good contacts and knew the ropeshere was bribery, favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there waomosexuality and prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol distillerom potatoes. The positions of trust were given only to the commoriminals, especially the gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sorf aristocracy. All the dirty jobs were done by the politicals.
There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every descriptionrug-peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-marketeers, drunks, prostitutesome of the drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combino suppress them. An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, witreat tumbling breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down her struggles, was carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guardsho had hold of her one at each corner. They wrenched off the boots withich she had been trying to kick them, and dumped her down acrosinston's lap, almost breaking his thigh-bones. The woman hoisted herselpright and followed them out with a yell of 'F---- bastards!' Thenoticing that she was sitting on something uneven, she slid off Winston'nees on to the bench.
'Beg pardon, dearie,' she said. 'I wouldn't 'a sat on you, only the buggerut me there. They dono 'ow to treat a lady, do they?' She paused, patteer breast, and belched. 'Pardon,' she said, 'I ain't meself, quite.'
She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor.
'Thass better,' she said, leaning back with closed eyes. 'Never keep iown, thass what I say. Get it up while it's fresh on your stomach, like.'
She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and seemed immediatelo take a fancy to him. She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew hiowards her, breathing beer and vomit into his face.
'Wass your name, dearie?' she said.
'Smith,' said Winston.
'Smith?' said the woman. 'Thass funny. My name's Smith too. Why,' shdded sentimentally, 'I might be your mother!'
She might, thought Winston, be his mother. She was about the right age anhysique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twentears in a forced-labour camp.
No one else had spoken to him. To a surprising extent the ordinarriminals ignored the Party prisoners. 'The polITS,' they called themith a sort of uninterested contempt. The Party prisoners seemed terrifief speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another. Onlnce, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together ohe bench, he overheard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispereords; and in particular a reference to something called 'room one-oh-one'hich he did not understand.
It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here. Thull pain in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better anometimes worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly. Whet grew worse he thought only of the pain itself, and of his desire foood. When it grew better, panic took hold of him. There were momenthen he foresaw the things that would happen to him with such actualithat his heart galloped and his breath stopped. He felt the smash oruncheons on his elbows and iron-shod boots on his shins; he saw himselrovelling on the floor, screaming for mercy through broken teeth. Hardly thought of Julia. He could not fix his mind on her. He loved hend would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew thules of arithmetic. He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wonderehat was happening to her. He thought oftener of O'Brien, with a flickerinope. O'Brien might know that he had been arrested. The Brotherhood, had said, never tried to save its members. But there was the razor bladehey would send the razor blade if they could. There would be perhaps fiveconds before the guard could rush into the cell. The blade would bitnto him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that helt would be cut to the bone. Everything came back to his sick body, whichrank trembling from the smallest pain. He was not certain that he woulse the razor blade even if he got the chance. It was more natural to exisrom moment to moment, accepting another ten minutes' life even with thertainty that there was torture at the end of it.
Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in thalls of the cell. It should have been easy, but he always lost count aome point or another. More often he wondered where he was, and what timf day it was. At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylighutside, and at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness. Ihis place, he knew instinctively, the lights would never be turned outt was the place with no darkness: he saw now why O'Brien had seemed tecognize the allusion. In the Ministry of Love there were no windows. Hiell might be at the heart of the building or against its outer wall; iight be ten floors below ground, or thirty above it. He moved himselentally from place to place, and tried to determine by the feeling of hiody whether he was perched high in the air or buried deep underground.
There was a sound of marching boots outside. The steel door opened wit clang. A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed tlitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featureace was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway. He motioneo the guards outside to bring in the prisoner they were leading. Thoet Ampleforth shambled into the cell. The door clanged shut again.
Ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from side to side, ahough having some idea that there was another door to go out of, and theegan to wander up and down the cell. He had not yet noticed Winston'resence. His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre abovhe level of Winston's head. He was shoeless; large, dirty toes werticking out of the holes in his socks. He was also several days awarom a shave. A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, givinim an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame anervous movements.
Winston roused himself a little from his lethargy. He must speao Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the telescreen. It was eveonceivable that Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade.
'Ampleforth,' he said.
There was no yell from the telescreen. Ampleforth paused, mildly startledis eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston.
'Ah, Smith!' he said. 'You too!'
'What are you in for?'
'To tell you the truth--' He sat down awkwardly on the bench oppositinston. 'There is only one offence, is there not?' he said.
'And have you committed it?'
'Apparently I have.'
He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, ahough trying to remember something.
'These things happen,' he began vaguely. 'I have been able to recall onnstance--a possible instance. It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly. Were producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling. I allowed thord "God" to remain at the end of a line. I could not help it!' he addelmost indignantly, raising his face to look at Winston. 'It was impossiblo change the line. The rhyme was "rod". Do you realize that there are onlwelve rhymes to "rod" in the entire language? For days I had racked mrains. There WAS no other rhyme.'
The expression on his face changed. The annoyance passed out of it and fo moment he looked almost pleased. A sort of intellectual warmth, the jof the pedant who has found out some useless fact, shone through the dirnd scrubby hair.
'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the whole history of Englisoetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lackhymes?'
No, that particular thought had never occurred to Winston. Nor, in thircumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting.
'Do you know what time of day it is?' he said.
Ampleforth looked startled again. 'I had hardly thought about it. Therrested me--it could be two days ago--perhaps three.' His eyes flitteound the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhereThere is no difference between night and day in this place. I do not seow one can calculate the time.'
They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without apparent reason yell from the telescreen bade them be silent. Winston sat quietly, hiands crossed. Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narroench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round onnee, then round the other. The telescreen barked at him to keep stillime passed. Twenty minutes, an hour--it was difficult to judge. Once morhere was a sound of boots outside. Winston's entrails contracted. Soonery soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots woulean that his own turn had come.
The door opened. The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell. Wit brief movement of the hand he indicated Ampleforth.
'Room 101,' he said.
Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguelerturbed, but uncomprehending.
What seemed like a long time passed. The pain in Winston's belly haevived. His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a balalling again and again into the same series of slots. He had only sihoughts. The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and thcreaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade. There was another spasm in hintrails, the heavy boots were approaching. As the door opened, the wavf air that it created brought in a powerful smell of cold sweat. Parsonalked into the cell. He was wearing khaki shorts and a sports-shirt.
This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness.
'YOU here!' he said.
Parsons gave Winston a glance in which there was neither interest nourprise, but only misery. He began walking jerkily up and down, evidentlnable to keep still. Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it wapparent that they were trembling. His eyes had a wide-open, staring looks though he could not prevent himself from gazing at something in thiddle distance.
'What are you in for?' said Winston.
'Thoughtcrime!' said Parsons, almost blubbering. The tone of his voicmplied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulouorror that such a word could be applied to himself. He paused oppositinston and began eagerly appealing to him: 'You don't think they'll shooe, do you, old chap? They don't shoot you if you haven't actually donnything--only thoughts, which you can't help? I know they give you a faiearing. Oh, I trust them for that! They'll know my record, won't theyOU know what kind of chap I was. Not a bad chap in my way. Not brainy, oourse, but keen. I tried to do my best for the Party, didn't I? I'll geff with five years, don't you think? Or even ten years? A chap like mould make himself pretty useful in a labour-camp. They wouldn't shoot mor going off the rails just once?'
'Are you guilty?' said Winston.
'Of course I'm guilty!' cried Parsons with a servile glance at thelescreen. 'You don't think the Party would arrest an innocent mano you?' His frog-like face grew calmer, and even took on a slightlanctimonious expression. 'Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,e said sententiously. 'It's insidious. It can get hold of you withouour even knowing it. Do you know how it got hold of me? In my sleep! Yeshat's a fact. There I was, working away, trying to do my bit--never kne had any bad stuff in my mind at all. And then I started talking in mleep. Do you know what they heard me saying?'
He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medical reasons ttter an obscenity.
'"Down with Big Brother!" Yes, I said that! Said it over and over againt seems. Between you and me, old man, I'm glad they got me before it wenny further. Do you know what I'm going to say to them when I go up beforhe tribunal? "Thank you," I'm going to say, "thank you for saving mefore it was too late."'
'Who denounced you?' said Winston.
'It was my little daughter,' said Parsons with a sort of doleful prideShe listened at the keyhole. Heard what I was saying, and nipped off the patrols the very next day. Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh don't bear her any grudge for it. In fact I'm proud of her. It shows rought her up in the right spirit, anyway.'
He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting onging glance at the lavatory pan. Then he suddenly ripped down hihorts.
'Excuse me, old man,' he said. 'I can't help it. It's the waiting.'
He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan. Winston covered hiace with his hands.
'Smith!' yelled the voice from the telescreen. '6079 Smith W.! Uncover youace. No faces covered in the cells.'
Winston uncovered his face. Parsons used the lavatory, loudly anbundantly. It then turned out that the plug was defective and the celtank abominably for hours afterwards.
Parsons was removed. More prisoners came and went, mysteriously. One, oman, was consigned to 'Room 101', and, Winston noticed, seemed to shrivend turn a different colour when she heard the words. A time came when, it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight. There were six prisonern the cell, men and women. All sat very still. Opposite Winston there sa man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some largearmless rodent. His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottohat it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of fooucked away there. His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to facnd turned quickly away again when he caught anyone's eye.
The door opened, and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance sen momentary chill through Winston. He was a commonplace, mean-looking maho might have been an engineer or technician of some kind. But what watartling was the emaciation of his face. It was like a skull. Because ots thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and thyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody oomething.
The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston. Winstoid not look at him again, but the tormented, skull-like face was aivid in his mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyesuddenly he realized what was the matter. The man was dying of starvationhe same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in thell. There was a very faint stirring all the way round the bench. Thyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, theurning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irresistiblttraction. Presently he began to fidget on his seat. At last he stood upaddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into the pocket of his overallsnd, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of bread to thkull-faced man.
There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen. The chinless maumped in his tracks. The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his handehind his back, as though demonstrating to all the world that he refusehe gift.
'Bumstead!' roared the voice. '2713 Bumstead J.! Let fall that piece oread!'
The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor.
'Remain standing where you are,' said the voice. 'Face the door. Make novement.'
The chinless man obeyed. His large pouchy cheeks were quiverinncontrollably. The door clanged open. As the young officer entered antepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard witnormous arms and shoulders. He took his stand opposite the chinless mannd then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, witll the weight of his body behind it, full in the chinless man's mouthhe force of it seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor. His bodas flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatoreat. For a moment he lay as though stunned, with dark blood oozing frois mouth and nose. A very faint whimpering or squeaking, which seemenconscious, came out of him. Then he rolled over and raised himselnsteadily on hands and knees. Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the twalves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth.
The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees. Thhinless man climbed back into his place. Down one side of his face thlesh was darkening. His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloureass with a black hole in the middle of it.
From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overallsis grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than evers though he were trying to discover how much the others despised him fois humiliation.
The door opened. With a small gesture the officer indicated thkull-faced man.
'Room 101,' he said.
There was a gasp and a flurry at Winston's side. The man had actualllung himself on his knees on the floor, with his hand clasped together.
'Comrade! Officer!' he cried. 'You don't have to take me to that placeaven't I told you everything already? What else is it you want to knowhere's nothing I wouldn't confess, nothing! Just tell me what it is an'll confess straight off. Write it down and I'll sign it--anythingot room 101!'
'Room 101,' said the officer.
The man's face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not havelieved possible. It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green.
'Do anything to me!' he yelled. 'You've been starving me for weeks. Finist off and let me die. Shoot me. Hang me. Sentence me to twenty-fivears. Is there somebody else you want me to give away? Just say who it ind I'll tell you anything you want. I don't care who it is or what you do them. I've got a wife and three children. The biggest of them isn't siears old. You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats iront of my eyes, and I'll stand by and watch it. But not Room 101!'
'Room 101,' said the officer.
The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though witome idea that he could put another victim in his own place. His eyeettled on the smashed face of the chinless man. He flung out a lean arm.
'That's the one you ought to be taking, not me!' he shouted. 'You didn'ear what he was saying after they bashed his face. Give me a chance an'll tell you every word of it. HE'S the one that's against the Party, noe.' The guards stepped forward. The man's voice rose to a shriek. 'Yoidn't hear him!' he repeated. 'Something went wrong with the telescreenE'S the one you want. Take him, not me!'
The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms. But just ahis moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed onf the iron legs that supported the bench. He had set up a wordlesowling, like an animal. The guards took hold of him to wrench him looseut he clung on with astonishing strength. For perhaps twenty secondhey were hauling at him. The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed oheir knees, looking straight in front of them. The howling stopped; than had no breath left for anything except hanging on. Then there was ifferent kind of cry. A kick from a guard's boot had broken the fingerf one of his hands. They dragged him to his feet.
'Room 101,' said the officer.
The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing hirushed hand, all the fight had gone out of him.
A long time passed. If it had been midnight when the skull-faced man waaken away, it was morning: if morning, it was afternoon. Winston walone, and had been alone for hours. The pain of sitting on the narroench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by thelescreen. The piece of bread still lay where the chinless man haropped it. At the beginning it needed a hard effort not to look at itut presently hunger gave way to thirst. His mouth was sticky anvil-tasting. The humming sound and the unvarying white light induced ort of faintness, an empty feeling inside his head. He would get uecause the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would siown again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure otaying on his feet. Whenever his physical sensations were a little undeontrol the terror returned. Sometimes with a fading hope he thought o'Brien and the razor blade. It was thinkable that the razor blade mighrrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed. More dimly he thoughf Julia. Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than hehe might be screaming with pain at this moment. He thought: 'If I coulave Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it? Yes, I would.' But thaas merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ougho take it. He did not feel it. In this place you could not feel anythingxcept pain and foreknowledge of pain. Besides, was it possible, when yoere actually suffering it, to wish for any reason that your own paihould increase? But that question was not answerable yet.
The boots were approaching again. The door opened. O'Brien came in.
Winston started to his feet. The shock of the sight had driven alaution out of him. For the first time in many years he forgot thresence of the telescreen.
'They've got you too!' he cried.
'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a mild, almost regretfurony. He stepped aside. From behind him there emerged a broad-chesteuard with a long black truncheon in his hand.
'You know this, Winston,' said O'Brien. 'Don't deceive yourself. You dinow it--you have always known it.'
Yes, he saw now, he had always known it. But there was no time to think ohat. All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard's hand. It mighall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, ohe elbow----
The elbow! He had slumped to his knees, almost paralysed, clasping thtricken elbow with his other hand. Everything had exploded into yelloight. Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such painhe light cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him. Thuard was laughing at his contortions. One question at any rate wanswered. Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increasf pain. Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stopothing in the world was so bad as physical pain. In the face of paihere are no heroes, no heroes, he thought over and over as he writhen the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left arm.
Chapter 2
He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it waigher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that hould not move. Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on hiace. O'Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him intently. Ahe other side of him stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermiyringe.
Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only graduallye had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quitifferent world, a sort of underwater world far beneath it. How long had been down there he did not know. Since the moment when they arresteim he had not seen darkness or daylight. Besides, his memories were noontinuous. There had been times when consciousness, even the sort oonsciousness that one has in sleep, had stopped dead and started agaifter a blank interval. But whether the intervals were of days or weekr only seconds, there was no way of knowing.
With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started. Later he wao realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routinnterrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected. There was ong range of crimes--espionage, sabotage, and the like--to which everyonad to confess as a matter of course. The confession was a formalityhough the torture was real. How many times he had been beaten, how lonhe beatings had continued, he could not remember. Always there were fivr six men in black uniforms at him simultaneously. Sometimes it waists, sometimes it was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimet was boots. There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopelesffort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicksn his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groinn his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine. There were timehen it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemeo him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could noorce himself into losing consciousness. There were times when his nervo forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beatinegan, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enougo make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. Therere other times when he started out with the resolve of confessinothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps oain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when haid to himself: 'I will confess, but not yet. I must hold out till thain becomes unbearable. Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I wilell them what they want.' Sometimes he was beaten till he could hardltand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the stone floor of a celleft to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and beaten againhere were also longer periods of recovery. He remembered them dimlyecause they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor. He remembered a celith a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, and a tiash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee. Hemembered a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hairnd businesslike, unsympathetic men in white coats feeling his pulseapping his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers oveim in search for broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to makim sleep.
The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horroo which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers wernsatisfactory. His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniformut Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements anlashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods whicasted--he thought, he could not be sure--ten or twelve hours at a stretchhese other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but was not chiefly pain that they relied on. They slapped his face, wrunis ears, pulled his hair, made him stand on one leg, refused him leave trinate, shone glaring lights in his face until his eyes ran with waterut the aim of this was simply to humiliate him and destroy his power orguing and reasoning. Their real weapon was the merciless questioninhat went on and on, hour after hour, tripping him up, laying traps foim, twisting everything that he said, convicting him at every step oies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame arom nervous fatigue. Sometimes he would weep half a dozen times in ingle session. Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatenet every hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again; but sometimehey would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him ihe name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether eveow he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish tndo the evil he had done. When his nerves were in rags after hours ouestioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears. In thnd the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots anists of the guards. He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand thaigned, whatever was demanded of him. His sole concern was to find ouhat they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before thullying started anew. He confessed to the assassination of eminent Partembers, the distribution of seditious pamphlets, embezzlement of publiunds, sale of military secrets, sabotage of every kind. He confessed thae had been a spy in the pay of the Eastasian government as far back a968. He confessed that he was a religious believer, an admirer oapitalism, and a sexual pervert. He confessed that he had murdered hiife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wifas still alive. He confessed that for years he had been in personal toucith Goldstein and had been a member of an underground organization whicad included almost every human being he had ever known. It was easier tonfess everything and implicate everybody. Besides, in a sense it was alrue. It was true that he had been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyef the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed.
There were also memories of another kind. They stood out in his minisconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them.
He was in a cell which might have been either dark or light, because hould see nothing except a pair of eyes. Near at hand some kind onstrument was ticking slowly and regularly. The eyes grew larger and moruminous. Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, anas swallowed up.
He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights man in a white coat was reading the dials. There was a tramp of heavoots outside. The door clanged open. The waxed-faced officer marched inollowed by two guards.
'Room 101,' said the officer.
The man in the white coat did not turn round. He did not look at Winstoither; he was looking only at the dials.
He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of gloriousolden light, roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at thop of his voice. He was confessing everything, even the things he haucceeded in holding back under the torture. He was relating the entiristory of his life to an audience who knew it already. With him were thuards, the other questioners, the men in white coats, O'Brien, Juliar Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting witaughter. Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the future haomehow been skipped over and had not happened. Everything was all righthere was no more pain, the last detail of his life was laid barenderstood, forgiven.
He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-certainty that he haeard O'Brien's voice. All through his interrogation, although he haever seen him, he had had the feeling that O'Brien was at his elbow, jusut of sight. It was O'Brien who was directing everything. It was he whet the guards on to Winston and who prevented them from killing him. Ias he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when he shoulave a respite, when he should be fed, when he should sleep, when thrugs should be pumped into his arm. It was he who asked the questions anuggested the answers. He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he wahe inquisitor, he was the friend. And once--Winston could not remembehether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a momenf wakefulness--a voice murmured in his ear: 'Don't worry, Winston; yore in my keeping. For seven years I have watched over you. Now thurning-point has come. I shall save you, I shall make you perfect.' Has not sure whether it was O'Brien's voice; but it was the same voichat had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is narkness,' in that other dream, seven years ago.
He did not remember any ending to his interrogation. There was a period olackness and then the cell, or room, in which he now was had graduallaterialized round him. He was almost flat on his back, and unable to moveis body was held down at every essential point. Even the back of his heaas gripped in some manner. O'Brien was looking down at him gravely anather sadly. His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, witouches under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin. He was oldehan Winston had thought him; he was perhaps forty-eight or fifty. Undeis hand there was a dial with a lever on top and figures running rounhe face.
'I told you,' said O'Brien, 'that if we met again it would be here.'
'Yes,' said Winston.
Without any warning except a slight movement of O'Brien's hand, a wave oain flooded his body. It was a frightening pain, because he could not sehat was happening, and he had the feeling that some mortal injury waeing done to him. He did not know whether the thing was really happeningr whether the effect was electrically produced; but his body was beinrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart. Althoughe pain had brought the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all wahe fear that his backbone was about to snap. He set his teeth anreathed hard through his nose, trying to keep silent as long as possible.
'You are afraid,' said O'Brien, watching his face, 'that in another momenomething is going to break. Your especial fear is that it will be youackbone. You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping aparnd the spinal fluid dripping out of them. That is what you are thinkings it not, Winston?'
Winston did not answer. O'Brien drew back the lever on the dial. The wavf pain receded almost as quickly as it had come.
'That was forty,' said O'Brien. 'You can see that the numbers on this diaun up to a hundred. Will you please remember, throughout our conversationhat I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and thatever degree I choose? If you tell me any lies, or attempt trevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level ontelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly. Do you understanhat?'
'Yes,' said Winston.
O'Brien's manner became less severe. He resettled his spectaclehoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down. When he spoke his voicas gentle and patient. He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even riest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish.
'I am taking trouble with you, Winston,' he said, 'because you are wortrouble. You know perfectly well what is the matter with you. You havnown it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge. You arentally deranged. You suffer from a defective memory. You are unable temember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember othevents which never happened. Fortunately it is curable. You have neveured yourself of it, because you did not choose to. There was a smalffort of the will that you were not ready to make. Even now, I am welware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that it i virtue. Now we will take an example. At this moment, which power iceania at war with?'
'When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia.'
'With Eastasia. Good. And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasiaas it not?'
Winston drew in his breath. He opened his mouth to speak and then did nopeak. He could not take his eyes away from the dial.
'The truth, please, Winston. YOUR truth. Tell me what you think yoemember.'
'I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not aar with Eastasia at all. We were in alliance with them. The war wagainst Eurasia. That had lasted for four years. Before that----'
O'Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand.
'Another example,' he said. 'Some years ago you had a very serious delusiondeed. You believed that three men, three one-time Party members nameones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--men who were executed for treachery anabotage after making the fullest possible confession--were not guilty ohe crimes they were charged with. You believed that you had seenmistakable documentary evidence proving that their confessions weralse. There was a certain photograph about which you had a hallucinationou believed that you had actually held it in your hands. It was hotograph something like this.'
An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O'Brien's fingers. Foerhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston's vision. It wa photograph, and there was no question of its identity. It was THhotograph. It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, anutherford at the party function in New York, which he had chanced upoleven years ago and promptly destroyed. For only an instant it was beforis eyes, then it was out of sight again. But he had seen itnquestionably he had seen it! He made a desperate, agonizing effort trench the top half of his body free. It was impossible to move so much a centimetre in any direction. For the moment he had even forgotten thial. All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or aeast to see it.
'It exists!' he cried.
'No,' said O'Brien.
He stepped across the room. There was a memory hole in the opposite wall'Brien lifted the grating. Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirlinway on the current of warm air; it was vanishing in a flash of flame'Brien turned away from the wall.
'Ashes,' he said. 'Not even identifiable ashes. Dust. It does not existt never existed.'
'But it did exist! It does exist! It exists in memory. I remember itou remember it.'
'I do not remember it,' said O'Brien.
Winston's heart sank. That was doublethink. He had a feeling of deadlelplessness. If he could have been certain that O'Brien was lying, iould not have seemed to matter. But it was perfectly possible that O'Briead really forgotten the photograph. And if so, then already he would havorgotten his denial of remembering it, and forgotten the act oorgetting. How could one be sure that it was simple trickery? Perhaphat lunatic dislocation in the mind could really happen: that was thhought that defeated him.
O'Brien was looking down at him speculatively. More than ever he had thir of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child.
'There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past,' he saidRepeat it, if you please.'
'"Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the presenontrols the past,"' repeated Winston obediently.
'"Who controls the present controls the past,"' said O'Brien, nodding hiead with slow approval. 'Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past haeal existence?'
Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Winston. His eyes flitteowards the dial. He not only did not know whether 'yes' or 'no' was thnswer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer helieved to be the true one.
O'Brien smiled faintly. 'You are no metaphysician, Winston,' he saidUntil this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence. ill put it more precisely. Does the past exist concretely, in space? Ihere somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the pass still happening?'
'No.'
'Then where does the past exist, if at all?'
'In records. It is written down.'
'In records. And----?'
'In the mind. In human memories.'
'In memory. Very well, then. We, the Party, control all records, and wontrol all memories. Then we control the past, do we not?'
'But how can you stop people remembering things?' cried Winston agaiomentarily forgetting the dial. 'It is involuntary. It is outside oneselfow can you control memory? You have not controlled mine!'
O'Brien's manner grew stern again. He laid his hand on the dial.
'On the contrary,' he said, 'YOU have not controlled it. That is what harought you here. You are here because you have failed in humility, ielf-discipline. You would not make the act of submission which is thrice of sanity. You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one. Only thisciplined mind can see reality, Winston. You believe that reality iomething objective, external, existing in its own right. You also believhat the nature of reality is self-evident. When you delude yourself inthinking that you see something, you assume that everyone else sees thame thing as you. But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not externaleality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else. Not in the individuaind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in thind of the Party, which is collective and immortal. Whatever the Partolds to be the truth, is truth. It is impossible to see reality except booking through the eyes of the Party. That is the fact that you have goo relearn, Winston. It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of thill. You must humble yourself before you can become sane.'
He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying tink in.
'Do you remember,' he went on, 'writing in your diary, "Freedom is threedom to say that two plus two make four"?'
'Yes,' said Winston.
O'Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumidden and the four fingers extended.
'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'
'Four.'
'And if the party says that it is not four but five--then how many?'
'Four.'
The word ended in a gasp of pain. The needle of the dial had shot up tifty-five. The sweat had sprung out all over Winston's body. The air tornto his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching hieeth he could not stop. O'Brien watched him, the four fingers stilxtended. He drew back the lever. This time the pain was only slightlased.
'How many fingers, Winston?'
'Four.'
The needle went up to sixty.
'How many fingers, Winston?'
'Four! Four! What else can I say? Four!'
The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at it. The heavytern face and the four fingers filled his vision. The fingers stood uefore his eyes like pillars, enormous, blurry, and seeming to vibrateut unmistakably four.
'How many fingers, Winston?'
'Four! Stop it, stop it! How can you go on? Four! Four!'
'How many fingers, Winston?'
'Five! Five! Five!'
'No, Winston, that is no use. You are lying. You still think there arour. How many fingers, please?'
'Four! five! Four! Anything you like. Only stop it, stop the pain!'
Abruptly he was sitting up with O'Brien's arm round his shoulders. He haerhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds. The bonds that had held hiody down were loosened. He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollablyis teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks. For oment he clung to O'Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavrm round his shoulders. He had the feeling that O'Brien was his protectorhat the pain was something that came from outside, from some other sourcend that it was O'Brien who would save him from it.
'You are a slow learner, Winston,' said O'Brien gently.
'How can I help it?' he blubbered. 'How can I help seeing what is in fronf my eyes? Two and two are four.'
'Sometimes, Winston. Sometimes they are five. Sometimes they are threeometimes they are all of them at once. You must try harder. It is noasy to become sane.'
He laid Winston down on the bed. The grip of his limbs tightened againut the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped, leaving hierely weak and cold. O'Brien motioned with his head to the man in thhite coat, who had stood immobile throughout the proceedings. The man ihe white coat bent down and looked closely into Winston's eyes, felt hiulse, laid an ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then hodded to O'Brien.
'Again,' said O'Brien.
The pain flowed into Winston's body. The needle must be at seventyeventy-five. He had shut his eyes this time. He knew that the fingerere still there, and still four. All that mattered was somehow to stalive until the spasm was over. He had ceased to notice whether he warying out or not. The pain lessened again. He opened his eyes. O'Briead drawn back the lever.
'How many fingers, Winston?'
'Four. I suppose there are four. I would see five if I could. I am tryino see five.'
'Which do you wish: to persuade me that you see five, or really to sehem?'
'Really to see them.'
'Again,' said O'Brien.
Perhaps the needle was eighty--ninety. Winston could not intermittentlemember why the pain was happening. Behind his screwed-up eyelids orest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in anut, disappearing behind one another and reappearing again. He was tryino count them, he could not remember why. He knew only that it wampossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterioudentity between five and four. The pain died down again. When he openeis eyes it was to find that he was still seeing the same thingnnumerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past iither direction, crossing and recrossing. He shut his eyes again.
'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?'
'I don't know. I don't know. You will kill me if you do that again. Fourive, six--in all honesty I don't know.'
'Better,' said O'Brien.
A needle slid into Winston's arm. Almost in the same instant a blissfulealing warmth spread all through his body. The pain was alreadalf-forgotten. He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O'Brient sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heareemed to turn over. If he could have moved he would have stretched ou hand and laid it on O'Brien's arm. He had never loved him so deeply at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain. The oleeling, that at bottom it did not matter whether O'Brien was a frienr an enemy, had come back. O'Brien was a person who could be talked toerhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood. O'Briead tortured him to the edge of lunacy, and in a little while, it waertain, he would send him to his death. It made no difference. In somense that went deeper than friendship, they were intimates: somewhere other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a plachere they could meet and talk. O'Brien was looking down at him with axpression which suggested that the same thought might be in his own mindhen he spoke it was in an easy, conversational tone.
'Do you know where you are, Winston?' he said.
'I don't know. I can guess. In the Ministry of Love.'
'Do you know how long you have been here?'
'I don't know. Days, weeks, months--I think it is months.'
'And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?'
'To make them confess.'
'No, that is not the reason. Try again.'
'To punish them.'
'No!' exclaimed O'Brien. His voice had changed extraordinarily, and hiace had suddenly become both stern and animated. 'No! Not merely txtract your confession, not to punish you. Shall I tell you why we havrought you here? To cure you! To make you sane! Will you understandinston, that no one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our handncured? We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you havommitted. The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought ill we care about. We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change themo you understand what I mean by that?'
He was bending over Winston. His face looked enormous because of itearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below. Moreover ias filled with a sort of exaltation, a lunatic intensity. Again Winston'eart shrank. If it had been possible he would have cowered deeper inthe bed. He felt certain that O'Brien was about to twist the dial out oheer wantonness. At this moment, however, O'Brien turned away. He took ace or two up and down. Then he continued less vehemently:
'The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are nartyrdoms. You have read of the religious persecutions of the past. Ihe Middle Ages there was the Inquisition. It was a failure. It set ouo eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it. For every heretic iurned at the stake, thousands of others rose up. Why was that? Becaushe Inquisition killed its enemies in the open, and killed them whilhey were still unrepentant: in fact, it killed them because they wernrepentant. Men were dying because they would not abandon their trueliefs. Naturally all the glory belonged to the victim and all the shamo the Inquisitor who burned him. Later, in the twentieth century, therere the totalitarians, as they were called. There were the German Nazind the Russian Communists. The Russians persecuted heresy more cruellhan the Inquisition had done. And they imagined that they had learnerom the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must noake martyrs. Before they exposed their victims to public trial, theeliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity. They wore them dowy torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretchesonfessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves witbuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercynd yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over againhe dead men had become martyrs and their degradation was forgotten. Oncgain, why was it? In the first place, because the confessions that thead made were obviously extorted and untrue. We do not make mistakes ohat kind. All the confessions that are uttered here are true. We makhem true. And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against usou must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winstonosterity will never hear of you. You will be lifted clean out from thtream of history. We shall turn you into gas and pour you into thtratosphere. Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, no memory in a living brain. You will be annihilated in the past as wels in the future. You will never have existed.'
Then why bother to torture me? thought Winston, with a momentaritterness. O'Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered thhought aloud. His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a littlarrowed.
'You are thinking,' he said, 'that since we intend to destroy you utterlyo that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference--ihat case, why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first? That ihat you were thinking, was it not?'
'Yes,' said Winston.
O'Brien smiled slightly. 'You are a flaw in the pattern, Winston. You ar stain that must be wiped out. Did I not tell you just now that we arifferent from the persecutors of the past? We are not content witegative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission. When finallou surrender to us, it must be of your own free will. We do not destrohe heretic because he resists us: so long as he resists us we neveestroy him. We convert him, we capture his inner mind, we reshape hime burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to ouide, not in appearance, but genuinely, heart and soul. We make him one ourselves before we kill him. It is intolerable to us that an erroneouhought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerlest may be. Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any deviation. Ihe old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiminis heresy, exulting in it. Even the victim of the Russian purges coularry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passagaiting for the bullet. But we make the brain perfect before we blow iut. The command of the old despotisms was "Thou shalt not". The commanf the totalitarians was "Thou shalt". Our command is "THOU ART". No onhom we bring to this place ever stands out against us. Everyone is washelean. Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you oncelieved--Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--in the end we broke them down took part in their interrogation myself. I saw them gradually worn downhimpering, grovelling, weeping--and in the end it was not with pain oear, only with penitence. By the time we had finished with them they wernly the shells of men. There was nothing left in them except sorrow fohat they had done, and love of Big Brother. It was touching to seow they loved him. They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could dihile their minds were still clean.'
His voice had grown almost dreamy. The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasmas still in his face. He is not pretending, thought Winston, he is not ypocrite, he believes every word he says. What most oppressed him was thonsciousness of his own intellectual inferiority. He watched the heavet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of hiision. O'Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself. There was ndea that he had ever had, or could have, that O'Brien had not long agnown, examined, and rejected. His mind CONTAINED Winston's mind. Bun that case how could it be true that O'Brien was mad? It must be heinston, who was mad. O'Brien halted and looked down at him. His voice harown stern again.
'Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completelou surrender to us. No one who has once gone astray is ever spared. Anven if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, stilou would never escape from us. What happens to you here is for evernderstand that in advance. We shall crush you down to the point frohich there is no coming back. Things will happen to you from which yoould not recover, if you lived a thousand years. Never again will you bapable of ordinary human feeling. Everything will be dead inside youever again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or joy of livingr laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity. You will be hollowe shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with ourselves.'
He paused and signed to the man in the white coat. Winston was aware oome heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head'Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on evel with Winston's.
'Three thousand,' he said, speaking over Winston's head to the man in thhite coat.
Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves againsinston's temples. He quailed. There was pain coming, a new kind of pain'Brien laid a hand reassuringly, almost kindly, on his.
'This time it will not hurt,' he said. 'Keep your eyes fixed on mine.'
At this moment there was a devastating explosion, or what seemed like axplosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise. Theras undoubtedly a blinding flash of light. Winston was not hurt, onlrostrated. Although he had already been lying on his back when the thinappened, he had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into thaosition. A terrific painless blow had flattened him out. Also somethinad happened inside his head. As his eyes regained their focus hemembered who he was, and where he was, and recognized the face that waazing into his own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch omptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of his brain.
'It will not last,' said O'Brien. 'Look me in the eyes. What country iceania at war with?'
Winston thought. He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself wa citizen of Oceania. He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who wat war with whom he did not know. In fact he had not been aware that theras any war.
'I don't remember.'
'Oceania is at war with Eastasia. Do you remember that now?'
'Yes.'
'Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia. Since the beginning of youife, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of historyhe war has continued without a break, always the same war. Do yoemember that?'
'Yes.'
'Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had beeondemned to death for treachery. You pretended that you had seen a piecf paper which proved them innocent. No such piece of paper ever existedou invented it, and later you grew to believe in it. You remember now thery moment at which you first invented it. Do you remember that?'
'Yes.'
'Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you. You saw five fingerso you remember that?'
'Yes.'
O'Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the thumb concealed.
'There are five fingers there. Do you see five fingers?'
'Yes.'
And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the scenery of hiind changed. He saw five fingers, and there was no deformity. Theverything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and thewilderment came crowding back again. But there had been a moment--he diot know how long, thirty seconds, perhaps--of luminous certainty, wheach new suggestion of O'Brien's had filled up a patch of emptiness anecome absolute truth, and when two and two could have been three aasily as five, if that were what was needed. It had faded but befor'Brien had dropped his hand; but though he could not recapture it, hould remember it, as one remembers a vivid experience at some period one's life when one was in effect a different person.
'You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is at any rate possible.'
'Yes,' said Winston.
O'Brien stood up with a satisfied air. Over to his left Winston saw than in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of yringe. O'Brien turned to Winston with a smile. In almost the old mannee resettled his spectacles on his nose.
'Do you remember writing in your diary,' he said, 'that it did not mattehether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person whnderstood you and could be talked to? You were right. I enjoy talking tou. Your mind appeals to me. It resembles my own mind except that yoappen to be insane. Before we bring the session to an end you can ask m few questions, if you choose.'
'Any question I like?'
'Anything.' He saw that Winston's eyes were upon the dial. 'It is switcheff. What is your first question?'
'What have you done with Julia?' said Winston.
O'Brien smiled again. 'She betrayed you, Winston. Immediately--unreservedly have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly. You would hardlecognize her if you saw her. All her rebelliousness, her deceit, heolly, her dirty-mindedness--everything has been burned out of her. It wa perfect conversion, a textbook case.'
'You tortured her?'
O'Brien left this unanswered. 'Next question,' he said.
'Does Big Brother exist?'
'Of course he exists. The Party exists. Big Brother is the embodiment ohe Party.'
'Does he exist in the same way as I exist?'
'You do not exist,' said O'Brien.
Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him. He knew, or he coulmagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexistence; but they weronsense, they were only a play on words. Did not the statement, 'You dot exist', contain a logical absurdity? But what use was it to say sois mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments withich O'Brien would demolish him.
'I think I exist,' he said wearily. 'I am conscious of my own identity was born and I shall die. I have arms and legs. I occupy a particulaoint in space. No other solid object can occupy the same poinimultaneously. In that sense, does Big Brother exist?'
'It is of no importance. He exists.'
'Will Big Brother ever die?'
'Of course not. How could he die? Next question.'
'Does the Brotherhood exist?'
'That, Winston, you will never know. If we choose to set you free when wave finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still yoill never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No. As lons you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind.'
Winston lay silent. His breast rose and fell a little faster. He still haot asked the question that had come into his mind the first. He had goo ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it. Theras a trace of amusement in O'Brien's face. Even his spectacles seemed tear an ironical gleam. He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows wha am going to ask! At the thought the words burst out of him:
'What is in Room 101?'
The expression on O'Brien's face did not change. He answered drily:
'You know what is in Room 101, Winston. Everyone knows what is ioom 101.'
He raised a finger to the man in the white coat. Evidently the session wat an end. A needle jerked into Winston's arm. He sank almost instantlnto deep sleep.
Chapter 3
'There are three stages in your reintegration,' said O'Brien. 'There iearning, there is understanding, and there is acceptance. It is time foou to enter upon the second stage.'
As always, Winston was lying flat on his back. But of late his bonds werooser. They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees ittle and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms frohe elbow. The dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror. He coulvade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when hhowed stupidity that O'Brien pulled the lever. Sometimes they got throug whole session without use of the dial. He could not remember how manessions there had been. The whole process seemed to stretch out over ong, indefinite time--weeks, possibly--and the intervals between thessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two.
'As you lie there,' said O'Brien, 'you have often wondered--you have evesked me--why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and troubln you. And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentiallhe same question. You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you liven, but not its underlying motives. Do you remember writing in your diaryI understand HOW: I do not understand WHY"? It was when you thought abouwhy" that you doubted your own sanity. You have read THE BOOKoldstein's book, or parts of it, at least. Did it tell you anything thaou did not know already?'
'You have read it?' said Winston.
'I wrote it. That is to say, I collaborated in writing it. No book iroduced individually, as you know.'
'Is it true, what it says?'
'As description, yes. The programme it sets forth is nonsense. The secreccumulation of knowledge--a gradual spread of enlightenment--ultimatel proletarian rebellion--the overthrow of the Party. You foresaw yourselhat that was what it would say. It is all nonsense. The proletarians wilever revolt, not in a thousand years or a million. They cannot. I dot have to tell you the reason: you know it already. If you have eveherished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon them. Thers no way in which the Party can be overthrown. The rule of the Party ior ever. Make that the starting-point of your thoughts.'
He came closer to the bed. 'For ever!' he repeated. 'And now let us geack to the question of "how" and "why". You understand well enough HOhe Party maintains itself in power. Now tell me WHY we cling to powerhat is our motive? Why should we want power? Go on, speak,' he added ainston remained silent.
Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two. A feeling oeariness had overwhelmed him. The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had comack into O'Brien's face. He knew in advance what O'Brien would say. Thahe Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good ohe majority. That it sought power because men in the mass were frailowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, anust be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were strongehan themselves. That the choice for mankind lay between freedom anappiness, and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was betterhat the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated secoing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that others. The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was thahen O'Brien said this he would believe it. You could see it in his face'Brien knew everything. A thousand times better than Winston he knew whahe world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human beingived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept them there. He handerstood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all waustified by the ultimate purpose. What can you do, thought Winstongainst the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, who gives yourguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy?
'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said feebly. 'You believhat human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore----'
He started and almost cried out. A pang of pain had shot through his body'Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five.
'That was stupid, Winston, stupid!' he said. 'You should know better thao say a thing like that.'
He pulled the lever back and continued:
'Now I will tell you the answer to my question. It is this. The Parteeks power entirely for its own sake. We are not interested in the goof others; we are interested solely in power. Not wealth or luxury or lonife or happiness: only power, pure power. What pure power means you wilnderstand presently. We are different from all the oligarchies of thast, in that we know what we are doing. All the others, even those whesembled ourselves, were cowards and hypocrites. The German Nazis and thussian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they nevead the courage to recognize their own motives. They pretended, perhaphey even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for imited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise wheruman beings would be free and equal. We are not like that. We know thao one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it. Power iot a means, it is an end. One does not establish a dictatorship in ordeo safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establishe dictatorship. The object of persecution is persecution. The object oorture is torture. The object of power is power. Now do you begin tnderstand me?'
Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tiredness o'Brien's face. It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full ontelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himselelpless; but it was tired. There were pouches under the eyes, the skiagged from the cheekbones. O'Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringinhe worn face nearer.
'You are thinking,' he said, 'that my face is old and tired. You arhinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent thecay of my own body. Can you not understand, Winston, that the individuas only a cell? The weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organismo you die when you cut your fingernails?'
He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hann his pocket.
'We are the priests of power,' he said. 'God is power. But at presenower is only a word so far as you are concerned. It is time for you tather some idea of what power means. The first thing you must realizs that power is collective. The individual only has power in so far ae ceases to be an individual. You know the Party slogan: "Freedom ilavery". Has it ever occurred to you that it is reversible? Slavery ireedom. Alone--free--the human being is always defeated. It must be soecause every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of alailures. But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escaprom his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS tharty, then he is all-powerful and immortal. The second thing for you tealize is that power is power over human beings. Over the body--but, abovll, over the mind. Power over matter--external reality, as you would calt--is not important. Already our control over matter is absolute.'
For a moment Winston ignored the dial. He made a violent effort to raisimself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching hiody painfully.
'But how can you control matter?' he burst out. 'You don't even controhe climate or the law of gravity. And there are disease, pain, death----'
O'Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand. 'We control matter because control the mind. Reality is inside the skull. You will learn begrees, Winston. There is nothing that we could not do. Invisibilityevitation--anything. I could float off this floor like a soap bubble i wish to. I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it. You muset rid of those nineteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature. Wake the laws of Nature.'
'But you do not! You are not even masters of this planet. What abouurasia and Eastasia? You have not conquered them yet.'
'Unimportant. We shall conquer them when it suits us. And if we did nothat difference would it make? We can shut them out of existence. Oceanis the world.'
'But the world itself is only a speck of dust. And man is tiny--helplessow long has he been in existence? For millions of years the earth waninhabited.'
'Nonsense. The earth is as old as we are, no older. How could it be olderothing exists except through human consciousness.'
'But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals--mammoths anastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was eveeard of.'
'Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? Of course not. Nineteenth-centuriologists invented them. Before man there was nothing. After man, if hould come to an end, there would be nothing. Outside man there iothing.'
'But the whole universe is outside us. Look at the stars! Some of them ar million light-years away. They are out of our reach for ever.'
'What are the stars?' said O'Brien indifferently. 'They are bits of fir few kilometres away. We could reach them if we wanted to. Or we coullot them out. The earth is the centre of the universe. The sun and thtars go round it.'
Winston made another convulsive movement. This time he did not sanything. O'Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection:
'For certain purposes, of course, that is not true. When we navigate thcean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient tssume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millionpon millions of kilometres away. But what of it? Do you suppose it ieyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy? The stars can be near distant, according as we need them. Do you suppose our mathematicianre unequal to that? Have you forgotten doublethink?'
Winston shrank back upon the bed. Whatever he said, the swift answerushed him like a bludgeon. And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in thight. The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind--surely therust be some way of demonstrating that it was false? Had it not beexposed long ago as a fallacy? There was even a name for it, which had forgotten. A faint smile twitched the corners of O'Brien's mouth ae looked down at him.
'I told you, Winston,' he said, 'that metaphysics is not your stronoint. The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. But you aristaken. This is not solipsism. Collective solipsism, if you like. Buhat is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing. All this is igression,' he added in a different tone. 'The real power, the power wave to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men.e paused, and for a moment assumed again his air of a schoolmasteuestioning a promising pupil: 'How does one man assert his power ovenother, Winston?'
Winston thought. 'By making him suffer,' he said.
'Exactly. By making him suffer. Obedience is not enough. Unless he iuffering, how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not hiwn? Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. Power is in tearinuman minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes oour own choosing. Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we arreating? It is the exact opposite of the stupid hedonistic Utopias thahe old reformers imagined. A world of fear and treachery and torment, orld of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow noess but MORE merciless as it refines itself. Progress in our world wile progress towards more pain. The old civilizations claimed that theere founded on love or justice. Ours is founded upon hatred. In our worlhere will be no emotions except fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasementverything else we shall destroy--everything. Already we are breaking dowhe habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution. Wave cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, anetween man and woman. No one dares trust a wife or a child or a frienny longer. But in the future there will be no wives and no friendshildren will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes eggs fro hen. The sex instinct will be eradicated. Procreation will be an annuaormality like the renewal of a ration card. We shall abolish the orgasmur neurologists are at work upon it now. There will be no loyalty, excepoyalty towards the Party. There will be no love, except the love oig Brother. There will be no laughter, except the laugh of triumph ove defeated enemy. There will be no art, no literature, no science. Whee are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science. There will bo distinction between beauty and ugliness. There will be no curiosityo enjoyment of the process of life. All competing pleasures will bestroyed. But always--do not forget this, Winston--always there will bhe intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growinubtler. Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victoryhe sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. If you want icture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face--for ever.'
He paused as though he expected Winston to speak. Winston had tried thrink back into the surface of the bed again. He could not say anythingis heart seemed to be frozen. O'Brien went on:
'And remember that it is for ever. The face will always be there to btamped upon. The heretic, the enemy of society, will always be there, shat he can be defeated and humiliated over again. Everything that yoave undergone since you have been in our hands--all that will continuend worse. The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tortures, thxecutions, the disappearances will never cease. It will be a world oerror as much as a world of triumph. The more the Party is powerful, thess it will be tolerant: the weaker the opposition, the tighter thespotism. Goldstein and his heresies will live for ever. Every day, avery moment, they will be defeated, discredited, ridiculed, spat upon anet they will always survive. This drama that I have played out with youring seven years will be played out over and over again generation afteeneration, always in subtler forms. Always we shall have the heretic hert our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible--and in the entterly penitent, saved from himself, crawling to our feet of his owccord. That is the world that we are preparing, Winston. A world oictory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endlesressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power. You are beginning can see, to realize what that world will be like. But in the end yoill do more than understand it. You will accept it, welcome it, becomart of it.'
Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak. 'You can't!' he saieakly.
'What do you mean by that remark, Winston?'
'You could not create such a world as you have just described. It is ream. It is impossible.'
'Why?'
'It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and crueltyt would never endure.'
'Why not?'
'It would have no vitality. It would disintegrate. It would commiuicide.'
'Nonsense. You are under the impression that hatred is more exhaustinhan love. Why should it be? And if it were, what difference would thaake? Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster. Suppose that wuicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty. Still whaifference would it make? Can you not understand that the death of thndividual is not death? The party is immortal.'
As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helplessness. Moreover has in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O'Brien would twishe dial again. And yet he could not keep silent. Feebly, withourguments, with nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror ohat O'Brien had said, he returned to the attack.
'I don't know--I don't care. Somehow you will fail. Something will defeaou. Life will defeat you.'
'We control life, Winston, at all its levels. You are imagining that thers something called human nature which will be outraged by what we do anill turn against us. But we create human nature. Men are infinitelalleable. Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that throletarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us. Put it out of youind. They are helpless, like the animals. Humanity is the Party. Ththers are outside--irrelevant.'
'I don't care. In the end they will beat you. Sooner or later they wilee you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces.'
'Do you see any evidence that that is happening? Or any reason why ihould?'
'No. I believe it. I KNOW that you will fail. There is something in thniverse--I don't know, some spirit, some principle--that you will nevevercome.'
'Do you believe in God, Winston?'
'No.'
'Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?'
'I don't know. The spirit of Man.'
'And do you consider yourself a man?'
'Yes.'
'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. Your kind is extinct; wre the inheritors. Do you understand that you are ALONE? You are outsidistory, you are non-existent.' His manner changed and he said morarshly: 'And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our liend our cruelty?'
'Yes, I consider myself superior.'
O'Brien did not speak. Two other voices were speaking. After a momeninston recognized one of them as his own. It was a sound-track of thonversation he had had with O'Brien, on the night when he had enrolleimself in the Brotherhood. He heard himself promising to lie, to stealo forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prostitution, tisseminate venereal diseases, to throw vitriol in a child's face. O'Brieade a small impatient gesture, as though to say that the demonstratioas hardly worth making. Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped.
'Get up from that bed,' he said.
The bonds had loosened themselves. Winston lowered himself to the floond stood up unsteadily.
'You are the last man,' said O'Brien. 'You are the guardian of the humapirit. You shall see yourself as you are. Take off your clothes.'
Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together. The ziastener had long since been wrenched out of them. He could not remembehether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes ane time. Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowisags, just recognizable as the remnants of underclothes. As he slihem to the ground he saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the fand of the room. He approached it, then stopped short. An involuntary crad broken out of him.
'Go on,' said O'Brien. 'Stand between the wings of the mirror. You shalee the side view as well.'
He had stopped because he was frightened. A bowed, grey-colouredkeleton-like thing was coming towards him. Its actual appearance warightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself. Hoved closer to the glass. The creature's face seemed to be protrudedecause of its bent carriage. A forlorn, jailbird's face with a nobborehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, anattered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchfulhe cheeks were seamed, the mouth had a drawn-in look. Certainly it wais own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he hahanged inside. The emotions it registered would be different from thnes he felt. He had gone partially bald. For the first moment he hahought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that warey. Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was grey alver with ancient, ingrained dirt. Here and there under the dirt therere the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was anflamed mass with flakes of skin peeling off it. But the truly frighteninhing was the emaciation of his body. The barrel of the ribs was as narros that of a skeleton: the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thickehan the thighs. He saw now what O'Brien had meant about seeing the sidiew. The curvature of the spine was astonishing. The thin shoulders werunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neceemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull. At a guess hould have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suffering froome malignant disease.
'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face--the face of ember of the Inner Party--looks old and worn. What do you think of youwn face?'
He seized Winston's shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him.
'Look at the condition you are in!' he said. 'Look at this filthy grimll over your body. Look at the dirt between your toes. Look at thaisgusting running sore on your leg. Do you know that you stink like oat? Probably you have ceased to notice it. Look at your emaciation. Dou see? I can make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep. I coulnap your neck like a carrot. Do you know that you have lost twenty-fivilograms since you have been in our hands? Even your hair is coming oun handfuls. Look!' He plucked at Winston's head and brought away a tuff hair. 'Open your mouth. Nine, ten, eleven teeth left. How many had yohen you came to us? And the few you have left are dropping out of youead. Look here!'
He seized one of Winston's remaining front teeth between his powerfuhumb and forefinger. A twinge of pain shot through Winston's jaw. O'Briead wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots. He tossed it across thell.
'You are rotting away,' he said; 'you are falling to pieces. What are you bag of filth. Now turn around and look into that mirror again. Do yoee that thing facing you? That is the last man. If you are human, that iumanity. Now put your clothes on again.'
Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements. Until now he haot seemed to notice how thin and weak he was. Only one thought stirred iis mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imaginedhen suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling oity for his ruined body overcame him. Before he knew what he was doine had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and bursnto tears. He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle oones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: bue could not stop himself. O'Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almosindly.
'It will not last for ever,' he said. 'You can escape from it whenever yohoose. Everything depends on yourself.'
'You did it!' sobbed Winston. 'You reduced me to this state.'
'No, Winston, you reduced yourself to it. This is what you accepted wheou set yourself up against the Party. It was all contained in that firsct. Nothing has happened that you did not foresee.'
He paused, and then went on:
'We have beaten you, Winston. We have broken you up. You have seen whaour body is like. Your mind is in the same state. I do not think theran be much pride left in you. You have been kicked and flogged annsulted, you have screamed with pain, you have rolled on the floor iour own blood and vomit. You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayeverybody and everything. Can you think of a single degradation that haot happened to you?'
Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of hiyes. He looked up at O'Brien.
'I have not betrayed Julia,' he said.
O'Brien looked down at him thoughtfully. 'No,' he said; 'no; that ierfectly true. You have not betrayed Julia.'
The peculiar reverence for O'Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroylooded Winston's heart again. How intelligent, he thought, hontelligent! Never did O'Brien fail to understand what was said to himnyone else on earth would have answered promptly that he HAD betrayeulia. For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under thorture? He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, heharacter, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detaiverything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said ter and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, theiague plottings against the Party--everything. And yet, in the sense ihich he intended the word, he had not betrayed her. He had not stoppeoving her; his feelings towards her had remained the same. O'Brien haeen what he meant without the need for explanation.
'Tell me,' he said, 'how soon will they shoot me?'
'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien. 'You are a difficult case. Buon't give up hope. Everyone is cured sooner or later. In the end we shalhoot you.'
Chapter 4
He was much better. He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if ias proper to speak of days.
The white light and the humming sound were the same as ever, but the celas a little more comfortable than the others he had been in. There was illow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on. They haiven him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequentln a tin basin. They even gave him warm water to wash with. They had giveim new underclothes and a clean suit of overalls. They had dressed hiaricose ulcer with soothing ointment. They had pulled out the remnantf his teeth and given him a new set of dentures.
Weeks or months must have passed. It would have been possible now to keeount of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing soince he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals. He waetting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes hondered dimly whether he was getting them by night or by day. The fooas surprisingly good, with meat at every third meal. Once there was eve packet of cigarettes. He had no matches, but the never-speaking guarho brought his food would give him a light. The first time he tried tmoke it made him sick, but he persevered, and spun the packet out fo long time, smoking half a cigarette after each meal.
They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to thorner. At first he made no use of it. Even when he was awake he waompletely torpid. Often he would lie from one meal to the next almosithout stirring, sometimes asleep, sometimes waking into vague reverien which it was too much trouble to open his eyes. He had long growsed to sleeping with a strong light on his face. It seemed to make nifference, except that one's dreams were more coherent. He dreamed reat deal all through this time, and they were always happy dreams. Has in the Golden Country, or he was sitting among enormous gloriousunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, with O'Brien--not doinnything, merely sitting in the sun, talking of peaceful things. Suchoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams. Heemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that thtimulus of pain had been removed. He was not bored, he had no desiror conversation or distraction. Merely to be alone, not to be beater questioned, to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, waompletely satisfying.
By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt nmpulse to get off the bed. All he cared for was to lie quiet and feel thtrength gathering in his body. He would finger himself here and thererying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles werrowing rounder and his skin tauter. Finally it was established beyond oubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now definitely thickehan his knees. After that, reluctantly at first, he began exercisinimself regularly. In a little while he could walk three kilometreseasured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were growintraighter. He attempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished anumiliated to find what things he could not do. He could not move out of alk, he could not hold his stool out at arm's length, he could not stann one leg without falling over. He squatted down on his heels, and founhat with agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself t standing position. He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weighy his hands. It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetreut after a few more days--a few more mealtimes--even that feat waccomplished. A time came when he could do it six times running. He begao grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an intermittent beliehat his face also was growing back to normal. Only when he chanced to puis hand on his bald scalp did he remember the seamed, ruined face thaad looked back at him out of the mirror.
His mind grew more active. He sat down on the plank bed, his back againshe wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at thask of re-educating himself.
He had capitulated, that was agreed. In reality, as he saw now, he haeen ready to capitulate long before he had taken the decision. From thoment when he was inside the Ministry of Love--and yes, even during thosinutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from thelescreen told them what to do--he had grasped the frivolity, thhallowness of his attempt to set himself up against the power of tharty. He knew now that for seven years the Thought Police had watched hiike a beetle under a magnifying glass. There was no physical act, no worpoken aloud, that they had not noticed, no train of thought that they haot been able to infer. Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of hiiary they had carefully replaced. They had played sound-tracks to himhown him photographs. Some of them were photographs of Julia and himselfes, even... He could not fight against the Party any longer. Besideshe Party was in the right. It must be so; how could the immortalollective brain be mistaken? By what external standard could you chects judgements? Sanity was statistical. It was merely a question oearning to think as they thought. Only----!
The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers. He began to write dowhe thoughts that came into his head. He wrote first in large clumsapitals:
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it:
TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE
But then there came a sort of check. His mind, as though shying away froomething, seemed unable to concentrate. He knew that he knew what camext, but for the moment he could not recall it. When he did recall itt was only by consciously reasoning out what it must be: it did not comf its own accord. He wrote:
GOD IS POWER
He accepted everything. The past was alterable. The past never had beeltered. Oceania was at war with Eastasia. Oceania had always been at waith Eastasia. Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimehey were charged with. He had never seen the photograph that disproveheir guilt. It had never existed, he had invented it. He remembereemembering contrary things, but those were false memories, products oelf-deception. How easy it all was! Only surrender, and everything elsollowed. It was like swimming against a current that swept you backwardowever hard you struggled, and then suddenly deciding to turn round ano with the current instead of opposing it. Nothing had changed excepour own attitude: the predestined thing happened in any case. He hardlnew why he had ever rebelled. Everything was easy, except----!
Anything could be true. The so-called laws of Nature were nonsense. Thaw of gravity was nonsense. 'If I wished,' O'Brien had said, 'I coulloat off this floor like a soap bubble.' Winston worked it out. 'If hHINKS he floats off the floor, and if I simultaneously THINK I see hio it, then the thing happens.' Suddenly, like a lump of submerged wreckagreaking the surface of water, the thought burst into his mind: 'It doesn'eally happen. We imagine it. It is hallucination.' He pushed the thoughnder instantly. The fallacy was obvious. It presupposed that somewherr other, outside oneself, there was a 'real' world where 'real' thingappened. But how could there be such a world? What knowledge have we onything, save through our own minds? All happenings are in the mindhatever happens in all minds, truly happens.
He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no dangef succumbing to it. He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never tave occurred to him. The mind should develop a blind spot whenever angerous thought presented itself. The process should be automaticnstinctive. CRIMESTOP, they called it in Newspeak.
He set to work to exercise himself in crimestop. He presented himself witropositions--'the Party says the earth is flat', 'the party says thace is heavier than water'--and trained himself in not seeing or nonderstanding the arguments that contradicted them. It was not easyt needed great powers of reasoning and improvisation. The arithmeticaroblems raised, for instance, by such a statement as 'two and two makive' were beyond his intellectual grasp. It needed also a sort othleticism of mind, an ability at one moment to make the most delicatse of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the crudest logicarrors. Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as difficult tttain.
All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they woulhoot him. 'Everything depends on yourself,' O'Brien had said; but he knehat there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer. Iight be ten minutes hence, or ten years. They might keep him for years iolitary confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they mighelease him for a while, as they sometimes did. It was perfectly possiblhat before he was shot the whole drama of his arrest and interrogatioould be enacted all over again. The one certain thing was that deatever came at an expected moment. The tradition--the unspoken traditionomehow you knew it, though you never heard it said--was that they shoou from behind; always in the back of the head, without warning, as yoalked down a corridor from cell to cell.
One day--but 'one day' was not the right expression; just as probably ias in the middle of the night: once--he fell into a strange, blissfueverie. He was walking down the corridor, waiting for the bullet. He knehat it was coming in another moment. Everything was settled, smootheut, reconciled. There were no more doubts, no more arguments, no morain, no more fear. His body was healthy and strong. He walked easilyith a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight. He waot any longer in the narrow white corridors in the Ministry of Love, has in the enormous sunlit passage, a kilometre wide, down which he haeemed to walk in the delirium induced by drugs. He was in the Goldeountry, following the foot-track across the old rabbit-cropped pasturee could feel the short springy turf under his feet and the gentle sunshinn his face. At the edge of the field were the elm trees, faintly stirringnd somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay in the greeools under the willows.
Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror. The sweat broke out on hiackbone. He had heard himself cry aloud:
'Julia! Julia! Julia, my love! Julia!'
For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence. Shad seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him. It was as though shad got into the texture of his skin. In that moment he had loved her faore than he had ever done when they were together and free. Also he knehat somewhere or other she was still alive and needed his help.
He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself. What had he done? Hoany years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness?
In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside. They could noet such an outburst go unpunished. They would know now, if they had nonown before, that he was breaking the agreement he had made with theme obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party. In the old days he haidden a heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity. Now he haetreated a step further: in the mind he had surrendered, but he had hopeo keep the inner heart inviolate. He knew that he was in the wrong, bue preferred to be in the wrong. They would understand that--O'Brien woulnderstand it. It was all confessed in that single foolish cry.
He would have to start all over again. It might take years. He ran a hanver his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape. Therere deep furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the noslattened. Besides, since last seeing himself in the glass he had beeiven a complete new set of teeth. It was not easy to preservnscrutability when you did not know what your face looked like. In anase, mere control of the features was not enough. For the first time herceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also hide it froourself. You must know all the while that it is there, but until it ieeded you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shaphat could be given a name. From now onwards he must not only think righte must feel right, dream right. And all the while he must keep his hatreocked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of himself anet unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst.
One day they would decide to shoot him. You could not tell when it woulappen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess. Ias always from behind, walking down a corridor. Ten seconds would bnough. In that time the world inside him could turn over. And theuddenly, without a word uttered, without a check in his step, without thhanging of a line in his face--suddenly the camouflage would be down anang! would go the batteries of his hatred. Hatred would fill him like anormous roaring flame. And almost in the same instant bang! would go thullet, too late, or too early. They would have blown his brain to pieceefore they could reclaim it. The heretical thought would be unpunishednrepented, out of their reach for ever. They would have blown a hole iheir own perfection. To die hating them, that was freedom.
He shut his eyes. It was more difficult than accepting an intellectuaiscipline. It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself. Had got to plunge into the filthiest of filth. What was the most horribleickening thing of all? He thought of Big Brother. The enormous facbecause of constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it aeing a metre wide), with its heavy black moustache and the eyes thaollowed you to and fro, seemed to float into his mind of its own accordhat were his true feelings towards Big Brother?
There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage. The steel door swung opeith a clang. O'Brien walked into the cell. Behind him were the waxen-facefficer and the black-uniformed guards.
'Get up,' said O'Brien. 'Come here.'
Winston stood opposite him. O'Brien took Winston's shoulders between hitrong hands and looked at him closely.
'You have had thoughts of deceiving me,' he said. 'That was stupidtand up straighter. Look me in the face.'
He paused, and went on in a gentler tone:
'You are improving. Intellectually there is very little wrong with yout is only emotionally that you have failed to make progress. Tell meinston--and remember, no lies: you know that I am always able to detec lie--tell me, what are your true feelings towards Big Brother?'
'I hate him.'
'You hate him. Good. Then the time has come for you to take the last stepou must love Big Brother. It is not enough to obey him: you must lovim.'
He released Winston with a little push towards the guards.
'Room 101,' he said.
Chapter 5
At each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to knowhereabouts he was in the windowless building. Possibly there were slighifferences in the air pressure. The cells where the guards had beaten hiere below ground level. The room where he had been interrogated b'Brien was high up near the roof. This place was many metres undergrounds deep down as it was possible to go.
It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in. But he hardly noticeis surroundings. All he noticed was that there were two small tabletraight in front of him, each covered with green baize. One was only etre or two from him, the other was further away, near the door. He watrapped upright in a chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, noven his head. A sort of pad gripped his head from behind, forcing him took straight in front of him.
For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O'Brien came in.
'You asked me once,' said O'Brien, 'what was in Room 101. I told you thaou knew the answer already. Everyone knows it. The thing that is ioom 101 is the worst thing in the world.'
The door opened again. A guard came in, carrying something made of wire box or basket of some kind. He set it down on the further table. Becausf the position in which O'Brien was standing. Winston could not see whahe thing was.
'The worst thing in the world,' said O'Brien, 'varies from individual tndividual. It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, oy impalement, or fifty other deaths. There are cases where it is somuite trivial thing, not even fatal.'
He had moved a little to one side, so that Winston had a better view ohe thing on the table. It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on toor carrying it by. Fixed to the front of it was something that lookeike a fencing mask, with the concave side outwards. Although it was threr four metres away from him, he could see that the cage was divideengthways into two compartments, and that there was some kind of creaturn each. They were rats.
'In your case,' said O'Brien, 'the worst thing in the world happens to bats.'
A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, haassed through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cageut at this moment the meaning of the mask-like attachment in front of iuddenly sank into him. His bowels seemed to turn to water.
'You can't do that!' he cried out in a high cracked voice. 'You couldn'tou couldn't! It's impossible.'
'Do you remember,' said O'Brien, 'the moment of panic that used to occun your dreams? There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and oaring sound in your ears. There was something terrible on the other sidf the wall. You knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag into the open. It was the rats that were on the other side of the wall.'
'O'Brien!' said Winston, making an effort to control his voice. 'You knohis is not necessary. What is it that you want me to do?'
O'Brien made no direct answer. When he spoke it was in the schoolmasterisanner that he sometimes affected. He looked thoughtfully into thistance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behininston's back.
'By itself,' he said, 'pain is not always enough. There are occasions whe human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of deathut for everyone there is something unendurable--something that cannot bontemplated. Courage and cowardice are not involved. If you are fallinrom a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope. If you have come urom deep water it is not cowardly to fill your lungs with air. It ierely an instinct which cannot be destroyed. It is the same with thats. For you, they are unendurable. They are a form of pressure that yoannot withstand, even if you wished to. You will do what is required oou.'
'But what is it, what is it? How can I do it if I don't know what it is?'
O'Brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer tablee set it down carefully on the baize cloth. Winston could hear the blooinging in his ears. He had the feeling of sitting in utter lonelinesse was in the middle of a great empty plain, a flat desert drenched witunlight, across which all sounds came to him out of immense distanceset the cage with the rats was not two metres away from him. They wernormous rats. They were at the age when a rat's muzzle grows blunt anierce and his fur brown instead of grey.
'The rat,' said O'Brien, still addressing his invisible audiencealthough a rodent, is carnivorous. You are aware of that. You will haveard of the things that happen in the poor quarters of this town. In somtreets a woman dare not leave her baby alone in the house, even for fivinutes. The rats are certain to attack it. Within quite a small time theill strip it to the bones. They also attack sick or dying people. Thehow astonishing intelligence in knowing when a human being is helpless.'
There was an outburst of squeals from the cage. It seemed to reach Winstorom far away. The rats were fighting; they were trying to get at eacther through the partition. He heard also a deep groan of despairhat, too, seemed to come from outside himself.
O'Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed something in ithere was a sharp click. Winston made a frantic effort to tear himseloose from the chair. It was hopeless; every part of him, even his headas held immovably. O'Brien moved the cage nearer. It was less than etre from Winston's face.
'I have pressed the first lever,' said O'Brien. 'You understand thonstruction of this cage. The mask will fit over your head, leaving nxit. When I press this other lever, the door of the cage will slide uphese starving brutes will shoot out of it like bullets. Have you eveeen a rat leap through the air? They will leap on to your face and bortraight into it. Sometimes they attack the eyes first. Sometimes theurrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue.'
The cage was nearer; it was closing in. Winston heard a succession ohrill cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head. Bue fought furiously against his panic. To think, to think, even with plit second left--to think was the only hope. Suddenly the foul mustdour of the brutes struck his nostrils. There was a violent convulsion oausea inside him, and he almost lost consciousness. Everything had gonlack. For an instant he was insane, a screaming animal. Yet he came ouf the blackness clutching an idea. There was one and only one way to savimself. He must interpose another human being, the BODY of another humaeing, between himself and the rats.
The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision onything else. The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face. Thats knew what was coming now. One of them was leaping up and down, thther, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with his pinands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air. Winston could sehe whiskers and the yellow teeth. Again the black panic took hold of hime was blind, helpless, mindless.
'It was a common punishment in Imperial China,' said O'Brien aidactically as ever.
The mask was closing on his face. The wire brushed his cheek. And then--not was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope. Too late, perhapoo late. But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there waust ONE person to whom he could transfer his punishment--ONE body that hould thrust between himself and the rats. And he was shouting franticallyver and over.
'Do it to Julia! Do it to Julia! Not me! Julia! I don't care what you do her. Tear her face off, strip her to the bones. Not me! Julia! Not me!'
He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats. He watill strapped in the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, throughe walls of the building, through the earth, through the oceans, throughe atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars--alwayway, away, away from the rats. He was light years distant, but O'Brieas still standing at his side. There was still the cold touch of wirgainst his cheek. But through the darkness that enveloped him he hearnother metallic click, and knew that the cage door had clicked shut anot open.
Chapter 6
The Chestnut Tree was almost empty. A ray of sunlight slanting through indow fell on dusty table-tops. It was the lonely hour of fifteen. inny music trickled from the telescreens.
Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty glass. Now and agaie glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wallIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said. Unbidden, a waiter came anilled his glass up with Victory Gin, shaking into it a few drops fronother bottle with a quill through the cork. It was saccharine flavoureith cloves, the speciality of the cafe.
Winston was listening to the telescreen. At present only music was cominut of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might b special bulletin from the Ministry of Peace. The news from the Africaront was disquieting in the extreme. On and off he had been worryinbout it all day. A Eurasian army (Oceania was at war with Eurasiaceania had always been at war with Eurasia) was moving southward aerrifying speed. The mid-day bulletin had not mentioned any definitrea, but it was probable that already the mouth of the Congo was attlefield. Brazzaville and Leopoldville were in danger. One did not havo look at the map to see what it meant. It was not merely a question oosing Central Africa: for the first time in the whole war, the territorf Oceania itself was menaced.
A violent emotion, not fear exactly but a sort of undifferentiatexcitement, flared up in him, then faded again. He stopped thinking abouhe war. In these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject foore than a few moments at a time. He picked up his glass and drained it a gulp. As always, the gin made him shudder and even retch slightlyhe stuff was horrible. The cloves and saccharine, themselves disgustinnough in their sickly way, could not disguise the flat oily smell; anhat was worst of all was that the smell of gin, which dwelt with hiight and day, was inextricably mixed up in his mind with the smell ohose----
He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible never visualized them. They were something that he was half-aware ofovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils. As the giose in him he belched through purple lips. He had grown fatter since theeleased him, and had regained his old colour--indeed, more than regainet. His features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones waoarsely red, even the bald scalp was too deep a pink. A waiter, againbidden, brought the chessboard and the current issue of 'The Times'ith the page turned down at the chess problem. Then, seeing that Winston'lass was empty, he brought the gin bottle and filled it. There was need to give orders. They knew his habits. The chessboard was alwayaiting for him, his corner table was always reserved; even when the placas full he had it to himself, since nobody cared to be seen sitting tolose to him. He never even bothered to count his drinks. At irregulantervals they presented him with a dirty slip of paper which they saias the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged himt would have made no difference if it had been the other way about. Had always plenty of money nowadays. He even had a job, a sinecure, morighly-paid than his old job had been.
The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over. Winston raiseis head to listen. No bulletins from the front, however. It was merely rief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. In the preceding quartert appeared, the Tenth Three-Year Plan's quota for bootlaces had beeverfulfilled by 98 per cent.
He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces. It was a tricknding, involving a couple of knights. 'White to play and mate in twoves.' Winston looked up at the portrait of Big Brother. White alwayates, he thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism. Always, withouxception, it is so arranged. In no chess problem since the beginning ohe world has black ever won. Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvaryinriumph of Good over Evil? The huge face gazed back at him, full of calower. White always mates.
The voice from the telescreen paused and added in a different and mucraver tone: 'You are warned to stand by for an important announcement aifteen-thirty. Fifteen-thirty! This is news of the highest importanceake care not to miss it. Fifteen-thirty!' The tinkling music struck ugain.
Winston's heart stirred. That was the bulletin from the front; instincold him that it was bad news that was coming. All day, with little spurtf excitement, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in anut of his mind. He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarmincross the never-broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africike a column of ants. Why had it not been possible to outflank them iome way? The outline of the West African coast stood out vividly in hiind. He picked up the white knight and moved it across the board. THERas the proper spot. Even while he saw the black horde racing southward haw another force, mysteriously assembled, suddenly planted in their rearutting their communications by land and sea. He felt that by willing it has bringing that other force into existence. But it was necessary to acuickly. If they could get control of the whole of Africa, if they hairfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would cut Oceania in two. Iight mean anything: defeat, breakdown, the redivision of the world, thestruction of the Party! He drew a deep breath. An extraordinary medlef feeling--but it was not a medley, exactly; rather it was successivayers of feeling, in which one could not say which layer wandermost--struggled inside him.
The spasm passed. He put the white knight back in its place, but for thoment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problemis thoughts wandered again. Almost unconsciously he traced with hiinger in the dust on the table:
2+2=5
'They can't get inside you,' she had said. But they could get inside youWhat happens to you here is FOR EVER,' O'Brien had said. That was a truord. There were things, your own acts, from which you could never recoveromething was killed in your breast: burnt out, cauterized out.
He had seen her; he had even spoken to her. There was no danger in it. Hnew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in hioings. He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of thead wanted to. Actually it was by chance that they had met. It was in thark, on a vile, biting day in March, when the earth was like iron anll the grass seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a ferocuses which had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind. Has hurrying along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her noen metres away from him. It struck him at once that she had changed iome ill-defined way. They almost passed one another without a sign, thee turned and followed her, not very eagerly. He knew that there was nanger, nobody would take any interest in him. She did not speak. Shalked obliquely away across the grass as though trying to get rid of himhen seemed to resign herself to having him at her side. Presently theere in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs, useless either fooncealment or as protection from the wind. They halted. It was vilelold. The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasionalirty-looking crocuses. He put his arm round her waist.
There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden microphones: besideshey could be seen. It did not matter, nothing mattered. They could havain down on the ground and done THAT if they had wanted to. His flesroze with horror at the thought of it. She made no response whatever the clasp of his arm; she did not even try to disengage herself. He kneow what had changed in her. Her face was sallower, and there was a loncar, partly hidden by the hair, across her forehead and temple; but thaas not the change. It was that her waist had grown thicker, and, in urprising way, had stiffened. He remembered how once, after the explosiof a rocket bomb, he had helped to drag a corpse out of some ruins, anad been astonished not only by the incredible weight of the thing, but bts rigidity and awkwardness to handle, which made it seem more like stonhan flesh. Her body felt like that. It occurred to him that the texturf her skin would be quite different from what it had once been.
He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak. As they walked baccross the grass, she looked directly at him for the first time. Ias only a momentary glance, full of contempt and dislike. He wonderehether it was a dislike that came purely out of the past or whether ias inspired also by his bloated face and the water that the wind kepqueezing from his eyes. They sat down on two iron chairs, side by sidut not too close together. He saw that she was about to speak. She moveer clumsy shoe a few centimetres and deliberately crushed a twig. Heeet seemed to have grown broader, he noticed.
'I betrayed you,' she said baldly.
'I betrayed you,' he said.
She gave him another quick look of dislike.
'Sometimes,' she said, 'they threaten you with something something yoan't stand up to, can't even think about. And then you say, "Don't do io me, do it to somebody else, do it to so-and-so." And perhaps you mighretend, afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it take them stop and didn't really mean it. But that isn't true. At the timhen it happens you do mean it. You think there's no other way of savinourself, and you're quite ready to save yourself that way. You WANT it tappen to the other person. You don't give a damn what they suffer. Alou care about is yourself.'
'All you care about is yourself,' he echoed.
'And after that, you don't feel the same towards the other person anonger.'
'No,' he said, 'you don't feel the same.'
There did not seem to be anything more to say. The wind plastered theihin overalls against their bodies. Almost at once it became embarrassino sit there in silence: besides, it was too cold to keep still. She saiomething about catching her Tube and stood up to go.
'We must meet again,' he said.
'Yes,' she said, 'we must meet again.'
He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind herhey did not speak again. She did not actually try to shake him off, bualked at just such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of here had made up his mind that he would accompany her as far as the Tubtation, but suddenly this process of trailing along in the cold seemeointless and unbearable. He was overwhelmed by a desire not so much tet away from Julia as to get back to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which haever seemed so attractive as at this moment. He had a nostalgic visiof his corner table, with the newspaper and the chessboard and thver-flowing gin. Above all, it would be warm in there. The next momentot altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become separated froer by a small knot of people. He made a half-hearted attempt to catch uphen slowed down, turned, and made off in the opposite direction. When had gone fifty metres he looked back. The street was not crowded, bulready he could not distinguish her. Any one of a dozen hurrying figureight have been hers. Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longeecognizable from behind.
'At the time when it happens,' she had said, 'you do mean it.' He haeant it. He had not merely said it, he had wished it. He had wished thahe and not he should be delivered over to the----
Something changed in the music that trickled from the telescreen. racked and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it. And then--perhapt was not happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblancf sound--a voice was singing:
  'Under the spreading chestnut tre I sold you and you sold me----'
The tears welled up in his eyes. A passing waiter noticed that his glasas empty and came back with the gin bottle.
He took up his glass and sniffed at it. The stuff grew not less but mororrible with every mouthful he drank. But it had become the element hwam in. It was his life, his death, and his resurrection. It was gin thaank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morninghen he woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids aniery mouth and a back that seemed to be broken, it would have beempossible even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for thottle and teacup placed beside the bed overnight. Through the middaours he sat with glazed face, the bottle handy, listening to thelescreen. From fifteen to closing-time he was a fixture in the Chestnuree. No one cared what he did any longer, no whistle woke him, nelescreen admonished him. Occasionally, perhaps twice a week, he weno a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth and di little work, or what was called work. He had been appointed to ub-committee of a sub-committee which had sprouted from one of thnnumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in thompilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary. They werngaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it wahat they were reporting on he had never definitely found out. It waomething to do with the question of whether commas should be placenside brackets, or outside. There were four others on the committee, alf them persons similar to himself. There were days when they assemblend then promptly dispersed again, frankly admitting to one another thahere was not really anything to be done. But there were other days whehey settled down to their work almost eagerly, making a tremendous shof entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were neveinished--when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing abourew extraordinarily involved and abstruse, with subtle haggling oveefinitions, enormous digressions, quarrels--threats, even, to appeal tigher authority. And then suddenly the life would go out of them anhey would sit round the table looking at one another with extinct eyesike ghosts fading at cock-crow.
The telescreen was silent for a moment. Winston raised his head again. Thulletin! But no, they were merely changing the music. He had the map ofrica behind his eyelids. The movement of the armies was a diagram: lack arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow horizontallastward, across the tail of the first. As though for reassurance hooked up at the imperturbable face in the portrait. Was it conceivablhat the second arrow did not even exist?
His interest flagged again. He drank another mouthful of gin, picked uhe white knight and made a tentative move. Check. But it was evidentlot the right move, because----
Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind. He saw a candle-lit room with ast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nine or ten, sitting ohe floor, shaking a dice-box, and laughing excitedly. His mother waitting opposite him and also laughing.
It must have been about a month before she disappeared. It was a moment oeconciliation, when the nagging hunger in his belly was forgotten and hiarlier affection for her had temporarily revived. He remembered the daell, a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pannd the light indoors was too dull to read by. The boredom of the twhildren in the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable. Winston whinend grizzled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pullinverything out of place and kicking the wainscoting until the neighbouranged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently. In thnd his mother said, 'Now be good, and I'll buy you a toy. A loveloy--you'll love it'; and then she had gone out in the rain, to a littleneral shop which was still sporadically open nearby, and came back wit cardboard box containing an outfit of Snakes and Ladders. He could stilemember the smell of the damp cardboard. It was a miserable outfit. Thoard was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so ill-cut that theould hardly lie on their sides. Winston looked at the thing sulkily anithout interest. But then his mother lit a piece of candle and they saown on the floor to play. Soon he was wildly excited and shouting witaughter as the tiddly-winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and theame slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting-point. Thelayed eight games, winning four each. His tiny sister, too young tnderstand what the game was about, had sat propped up against a bolsteraughing because the others were laughing. For a whole afternoon they hall been happy together, as in his earlier childhood.
He pushed the picture out of his mind. It was a false memory. He waroubled by false memories occasionally. They did not matter so long ane knew them for what they were. Some things had happened, others had noappened. He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knighgain. Almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with latter. He had started as though a pin had run into him.
A shrill trumpet-call had pierced the air. It was the bulletin! Victoryt always meant victory when a trumpet-call preceded the news. A sort olectric drill ran through the cafe. Even the waiters had started anricked up their ears.
The trumpet-call had let loose an enormous volume of noise. Already axcited voice was gabbling from the telescreen, but even as it startet was almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside. The news haun round the streets like magic. He could hear just enough of what wassuing from the telescreen to realize that it had all happened, as he haoreseen; a vast seaborne armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow ihe enemy's rear, the white arrow tearing across the tail of the blackragments of triumphant phrases pushed themselves through the din: 'Vastrategic manoeuvre--perfect co-ordination--utter rout--half a milliorisoners--complete demoralization--control of the whole of Africa--brinhe war within measurable distance of its end--victory--greatest victorn human history--victory, victory, victory!'
Under the table Winston's feet made convulsive movements. He had notirred from his seat, but in his mind he was running, swiftly runninge was with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf. He looked up agait the portrait of Big Brother. The colossus that bestrode the worldhe rock against which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves in vain! Hhought how ten minutes ago--yes, only ten minutes--there had still beequivocation in his heart as he wondered whether the news from the fronould be of victory or defeat. Ah, it was more than a Eurasian army thaad perished! Much had changed in him since that first day in the Ministrf Love, but the final, indispensable, healing change had never happenedntil this moment.
The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisonernd booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a littlehe waiters were turning back to their work. One of them approached withe gin bottle. Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no attentios his glass was filled up. He was not running or cheering any longer. Has back in the Ministry of Love, with everything forgiven, his soul whits snow. He was in the public dock, confessing everything, implicatinverybody. He was walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feelinf walking in sunlight, and an armed guard at his back. The long-hoped-foullet was entering his brain.
He gazed up at the enormous face. Forty years it had taken him to learhat kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache. O cruel, needlesisunderstanding! O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breastwo gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose. But it was alight, everything was all right, the struggle was finished. He had wohe victory over himself. He loved Big Brother.
THE END
APPENDIX.
The Principles of Newspeak
Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and had been devised to meehe ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism. In the year 198here was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means oommunication, either in speech or writing. The leading articles iThe Times' were written in it, but this was a TOUR DE FORCE which coulnly be carried out by a specialist. It was expected that Newspeak woulave finally superseded Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we shoulall it) by about the year 2050. Meanwhile it gained ground steadily, alarty members tending to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructionore and more in their everyday speech. The version in use in 1984, anmbodied in the Ninth and Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, wa provisional one, and contained many superfluous words and archaiormations which were due to be suppressed later. It is with the finalerfected version, as embodied in the Eleventh Edition of the Dictionaryhat we are concerned here.
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expressioor the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsocut to make all other modes of thought impossible. It was intended thahen Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten heretical thought--that is, a thought diverging from the principles ongsoc--should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought iependent on words. Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact anften very subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member coulroperly wish to express, while excluding all other meanings and also thossibility of arriving at them by indirect methods. This was done partly the invention of new words, but chiefly by eliminating undesirablords and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, ano far as possible of all secondary meanings whatever. To give a singlxample. The word FREE still existed in Newspeak, but it could only bsed in such statements as 'This dog is free from lice' or 'This field iree from weeds'. It could not be used in its old sense of 'politicallree' or 'intellectually free' since political and intellectual freedom nonger existed even as concepts, and were therefore of necessity namelessuite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, reductiof vocabulary was regarded as an end in itself, and no word that could bispensed with was allowed to survive. Newspeak was designed not to extenut to DIMINISH the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectlssisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum.
Newspeak was founded on the English language as we now know it, thougany Newspeak sentences, even when not containing newly-created wordsould be barely intelligible to an English-speaker of our own day. Newspeaords were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabularyhe B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabularyt will be simpler to discuss each class separately, but the grammaticaeculiarities of the language can be dealt with in the section devoted the A vocabulary, since the same rules held good for all three categories.
THE A VOCABULARY. The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for thusiness of everyday life--for such things as eating, drinking, workingutting on one's clothes, going up and down stairs, riding in vehiclesardening, cooking, and the like. It was composed almost entirely of wordhat we already possess words like HIT, RUN, DOG, TREE, SUGAR, HOUSEIELD--but in comparison with the present-day English vocabulary theiumber was extremely small, while their meanings were far more rigidlefined. All ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged out ohem. So far as it could be achieved, a Newspeak word of this class waimply a staccato sound expressing ONE clearly understood concept. Iould have been quite impossible to use the A vocabulary for literarurposes or for political or philosophical discussion. It was intendenly to express simple, purposive thoughts, usually involving concretbjects or physical actions.
The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities. The first ohese was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts opeech. Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to verbstract words such as IF or WHEN) could be used either as verb, noundjective, or adverb. Between the verb and the noun form, when they werf the same root, there was never any variation, this rule of itselnvolving the destruction of many archaic forms. The word THOUGHT, foxample, did not exist in Newspeak. Its place was taken by THINK, whicid duty for both noun and verb. No etymological principle was followeere: in some cases it was the original noun that was chosen for retentionn other cases the verb. Even where a noun and verb of kindred meaninere not etymologically connected, one or other of them was frequentluppressed. There was, for example, no such word as CUT, its meaning beinufficiently covered by the noun-verb KNIFE. Adjectives were formed bdding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE. Thuor example, SPEEDFUL meant 'rapid' and SPEEDWISE meant 'quickly'. Certaif our present-day adjectives, such as GOOD, STRONG, BIG, BLACK, SOFTere retained, but their total number was very small. There was littleed for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be arrived at bdding -FUL to a noun-verb. None of the now-existing adverbs was retainedxcept for a very few already ending in -WISE: the -WISE termination wanvariable. The word WELL, for example, was replaced by GOODWISE.
In addition, any word--this again applied in principle to every word ihe language--could be negatived by adding the affix UN-, or could btrengthened by the affix PLUS-, or, for still greater emphasisOUBLEPLUS-. Thus, for example, UNCOLD meant 'warm', while PLUSCOLD anOUBLEPLUSCOLD meant, respectively, 'very cold' and 'superlatively cold't was also possible, as in present-day English, to modify the meaning olmost any word by prepositional affixes such as ANTE-, POST-, UP-, DOWN-tc. By such methods it was found possible to bring about an enormouiminution of vocabulary. Given, for instance, the word GOOD, there was need for such a word as BAD, since the required meaning was equallell--indeed, better--expressed by UNGOOD. All that was necessary, in anase where two words formed a natural pair of opposites, was to decidhich of them to suppress. DARK, for example, could be replaced by UNLIGHTr LIGHT by UNDARK, according to preference.
The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak grammar was its regularityubject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexionollowed the same rules. Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the pasarticiple were the same and ended in -ED. The preterite of STEAL waTEALED, the preterite of THINK was THINKED, and so on throughout thanguage, all such forms as SWAM, GAVE, BROUGHT, SPOKE, TAKEN, etc., beinbolished. All plurals were made by adding -S or -ES as the case might behe plurals OF MAN, OX, LIFE, were MANS, OXES, LIFES. Comparison odjectives was invariably made by adding -ER, -EST (GOOD, GOODER, GOODEST)rregular forms and the MORE, MOST formation being suppressed.
The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irregularlere the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstrative adjectives, and thuxiliary verbs. All of these followed their ancient usage, except thaHOM had been scrapped as unnecessary, and the SHALL, SHOULD tenses haeen dropped, all their uses being covered by WILL and WOULD. There werlso certain irregularities in word-formation arising out of the need foapid and easy speech. A word which was difficult to utter, or was liablo be incorrectly heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word; occasionallherefore, for the sake of euphony, extra letters were inserted into a worr an archaic formation was retained. But this need made itself felhiefly in connexion with the B vocabulary. WHY so great an importance wattached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in this essay.
THE B VOCABULARY. The B vocabulary consisted of words which had beeeliberately constructed for political purposes: words, that is to sayhich not only had in every case a political implication, but were intendeo impose a desirable mental attitude upon the person using them. Withou full understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to ushese words correctly. In some cases they could be translated intldspeak, or even into words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usuallemanded a long paraphrase and always involved the loss of certaivertones. The B words were a sort of verbal shorthand, often packinhole ranges of ideas into a few syllables, and at the same time morccurate and forcible than ordinary language.
The B words were in all cases compound words. [Compound words such aPEAKWRITE, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but these wererely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideological colour.hey consisted of two or more words, or portions of words, welded togethen an easily pronounceable form. The resulting amalgam was always oun-verb, and inflected according to the ordinary rules. To take a singlxample: the word GOODTHINK, meaning, very roughly, 'orthodoxy', or, ine chose to regard it as a verb, 'to think in an orthodox manner'. Thinflected as follows: noun-verb, GOODTHINK; past tense and past participleOODTHINKED; present participle, GOOD-THINKING; adjective, GOODTHINKFULdverb, GOODTHINKWISE; verbal noun, GOODTHINKER.
The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan. The words ohich they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placen any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounchile indicating their derivation. In the word CRIMETHINK (thoughtcrime)or instance, the THINK came second, whereas in THINKPOL (Thought Policet came first, and in the latter word POLICE had lost its second syllableecause of the great difficulty in securing euphony, irregular formationere commoner in the B vocabulary than in the A vocabulary. For examplehe adjective forms of MINITRUE, MINIPAX, and MINILUV were, respectivelyINITRUTHFUL, MINIPEACEFUL, and MINILOVELY, simply because -TRUEFULPAXFUL, and -LOVEFUL were slightly awkward to pronounce. In principleowever, all B words could inflect, and all inflected in exactly thame way.
Some of the B words had highly subtilized meanings, barely intelligible tnyone who had not mastered the language as a whole. Consider, for exampleuch a typical sentence from a 'Times' leading article as OLDTHINKERNBELLYFEEL INGSOC. The shortest rendering that one could make of thin Oldspeak would be: 'Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolutioannot have a full emotional understanding of the principles of Englisocialism.' But this is not an adequate translation. To begin with, irder to grasp the full meaning of the Newspeak sentence quoted abovene would have to have a clear idea of what is meant by INGSOC. And iddition, only a person thoroughly grounded in Ingsoc could appreciathe full force of the word BELLYFEEL, which implied a blind, enthusiasticceptance difficult to imagine today; or of the word OLDTHINK, which wanextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and decadence. But thpecial function of certain Newspeak words, of which OLDTHINK was oneas not so much to express meanings as to destroy them. These wordsecessarily few in number, had had their meanings extended until theontained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they werufficiently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be scrappend forgotten. The greatest difficulty facing the compilers of the Newspeaictionary was not to invent new words, but, having invented them, to makure what they meant: to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of wordhey cancelled by their existence.
As we have already seen in the case of the word FREE, words which hance borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake oonvenience, but only with the undesirable meanings purged out of themountless other words such as HONOUR, JUSTICE, MORALITY, INTERNATIONALISMEMOCRACY, SCIENCE, and RELIGION had simply ceased to exist. A few blankeords covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them. All wordrouping themselves round the concepts of liberty and equality, fonstance, were contained in the single word CRIMETHINK, while all wordrouping themselves round the concepts of objectivity and rationalisere contained in the single word OLDTHINK. Greater precision would haveen dangerous. What was required in a Party member was an outlook similao that of the ancient Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, thall nations other than his own worshipped 'false gods'. He did not need tnow that these gods were called Baal, Osiris, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and thike: probably the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxye knew Jehovah and the commandments of Jehovah: he knew, therefore, thall gods with other names or other attributes were false gods. In somewhahe same way, the party member knew what constituted right conduct, and ixceedingly vague, generalized terms he knew what kinds of departure frot were possible. His sexual life, for example, was entirely regulated bhe two Newspeak words SEXCRIME (sexual immorality) and GOODSEX (chastity)EXCRIME covered all sexual misdeeds whatever. It covered fornicationdultery, homosexuality, and other perversions, and, in addition, normantercourse practised for its own sake. There was no need to enumerathem separately, since they were all equally culpable, and, in principlell punishable by death. In the C vocabulary, which consisted of scientifind technical words, it might be necessary to give specialized names tertain sexual aberrations, but the ordinary citizen had no need of theme knew what was meant by GOODSEX--that is to say, normal intercoursetween man and wife, for the sole purpose of begetting children, anithout physical pleasure on the part of the woman: all else was SEXCRIMEn Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical thought furthehan the perception that it WAS heretical: beyond that point the necessarords were nonexistent.
No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral. A great many weruphemisms. Such words, for instance, as JOYCAMP (forced-labour camp) oINIPAX (Ministry of Peace, i.e. Ministry of War) meant almost the exacpposite of what they appeared to mean. Some words, on the other handisplayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature oceanic society. An example was PROLEFEED, meaning the rubbishntertainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the massesther words, again, were ambivalent, having the connotation 'good' whepplied to the Party and 'bad' when applied to its enemies. But iddition there were great numbers of words which at first sight appeareo be mere abbreviations and which derived their ideological colour norom their meaning, but from their structure.
So far as it could be contrived, everything that had or might havolitical significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocabulary. Thame of every organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, onstitution, or public building, was invariably cut down into the familiahape; that is, a single easily pronounced word with the smallest numbef syllables that would preserve the original derivation. In the Ministrf Truth, for example, the Records Department, in which Winston Smitorked, was called RECDEP, the Fiction Department was called FICDEP, theleprogrammes Department was called TELEDEP, and so on. This was noone solely with the object of saving time. Even in the early decades ohe twentieth century, telescoped words and phrases had been one of thharacteristic features of political language; and it had been noticehat the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked iotalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations. Examples were sucords as NAZI, GESTAPO, COMINTERN, INPRECORR, AGITPROP. In the beginninhe practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in Newspeat was used with a conscious purpose. It was perceived that in thubbreviating a name one narrowed and subtly altered its meaning, butting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to ithe words COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL, for instance, call up a compositicture of universal human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marxnd the Paris Commune. The word COMINTERN, on the other hand, suggesterely a tightly-knit organization and a well-defined body of doctrinet refers to something almost as easily recognized, and as limited iurpose, as a chair or a table. COMINTERN is a word that can be utterelmost without taking thought, whereas COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL is a phrasver which one is obliged to linger at least momentarily. In the same wayhe associations called up by a word like MINITRUE are fewer and morontrollable than those called up by MINISTRY OF TRUTH. This accounted nonly for the habit of abbreviating whenever possible, but also for thlmost exaggerated care that was taken to make every word easilronounceable.
In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitudf meaning. Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when ieemed necessary. And rightly so, since what was required, above all foolitical purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning whicould be uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in thpeaker's mind. The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force frohe fact that nearly all of them were very much alike. Almost invariablhese words--GOODTHINK, MINIPAX, PROLEFEED, SEXCRIME, JOYCAMP, INGSOCELLYFEEL, THINKPOL, and countless others--were words of two or threyllables, with the stress distributed equally between the first syllablnd the last. The use of them encouraged a gabbling style of speech, ance staccato and monotonous. And this was exactly what was aimed at. Thntention was to make speech, and especially speech on any subject nodeologically neutral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousnessor the purposes of everyday life it was no doubt necessary, or sometimeecessary, to reflect before speaking, but a Party member called upon take a political or ethical judgement should be able to spray forth thorrect opinions as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bulletsis training fitted him to do this, the language gave him an almosoolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh sounnd a certain wilful ugliness which was in accord with the spirit ongsoc, assisted the process still further.
So did the fact of having very few words to choose from. Relative to ouwn, the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it weronstantly being devised. Newspeak, indeed, differed from most all otheanguages in that its vocabulary grew smaller instead of larger everear. Each reduction was a gain, since the smaller the area of choicehe smaller the temptation to take thought. Ultimately it was hoped take articulate speech issue from the larynx without involving the higherain centres at all. This aim was frankly admitted in the Newspeak worUCKSPEAK, meaning 'to quack like a duck'. Like various other words ihe B vocabulary, DUCKSPEAK was ambivalent in meaning. Provided that thpinions which were quacked out were orthodox ones, it implied nothing buraise, and when 'The Times' referred to one of the orators of the Parts a DOUBLEPLUSGOOD DUCKSPEAKER it was paying a warm and valued compliment.
THE C VOCABULARY. The C vocabulary was supplementary to the others anonsisted entirely of scientific and technical terms. These resembled thcientific terms in use today, and were constructed from the same rootsut the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them ondesirable meanings. They followed the same grammatical rules as thords in the other two vocabularies. Very few of the C words had anurrency either in everyday speech or in political speech. Any scientifiorker or technician could find all the words he needed in the list devoteo his own speciality, but he seldom had more than a smattering of thords occurring in the other lists. Only a very few words were common tll lists, and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of Sciencs a habit of mind, or a method of thought, irrespective of its particularanches. There was, indeed, no word for 'Science', any meaning that iould possibly bear being already sufficiently covered by the word INGSOC.
From the foregoing account it will be seen that in Newspeak the expressiof unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossiblet was of course possible to utter heresies of a very crude kind, pecies of blasphemy. It would have been possible, for example, to saIG BROTHER IS UNGOOD. But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merelonveyed a self-evident absurdity, could not have been sustained beasoned argument, because the necessary words were not available. Ideanimical to Ingsoc could only be entertained in a vague wordless formnd could only be named in very broad terms which lumped together anondemned whole groups of heresies without defining them in doing sone could, in fact, only use Newspeak for unorthodox purposes bllegitimately translating some of the words back into Oldspeak. Foxample, ALL MANS ARE EQUAL was a possible Newspeak sentence, but onln the same sense in which ALL MEN ARE REDHAIRED is a possible Oldspeaentence. It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expresse palpable untruth--i.e. that all men are of equal size, weight, otrength. The concept of political equality no longer existed, and thiecondary meaning had accordingly been purged out of the word EQUALn 1984, when Oldspeak was still the normal means of communicationhe danger theoretically existed that in using Newspeak words one mighemember their original meanings. In practice it was not difficult fony person well grounded in DOUBLETHINK to avoid doing this, but withi couple of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would havanished. A person growing up with Newspeak as his sole language would nore know that EQUAL had once had the secondary meaning of 'politicallqual', or that FREE had once meant 'intellectually free', than fonstance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of thecondary meanings attaching to QUEEN and ROOK. There would be manrimes and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simplecause they were nameless and therefore unimaginable. And it was to boreseen that with the passage of time the distinguishing characteristicf Newspeak would become more and more pronounced--its words growinewer and fewer, their meanings more and more rigid, and the chance outting them to improper uses always diminishing.
When Oldspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link withe past would have been severed. History had already been rewrittenut fragments of the literature of the past survived here and theremperfectly censored, and so long as one retained one's knowledge oldspeak it was possible to read them. In the future such fragments, evef they chanced to survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatablet was impossible to translate any passage of Oldspeak into Newspeak unlest either referred to some technical process or some very simple everydaction, or was already orthodox (GOODTHINKFUL would be the Newspeaxpression) in tendency. In practice this meant that no book written beforpproximately 1960 could be translated as a whole. Pre-revolutionariterature could only be subjected to ideological translation--that islteration in sense as well as language. Take for example the well-knowassage from the Declaration of Independence:
WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF-EVIDENT, THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUALHAT THEY ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTSHAT AMONG THESE ARE LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESSHAT TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MENERIVING THEIR POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED. THAT WHENEVENY FORM OF GOVERNMENT BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE OF THOSE ENDS, IT IS THE RIGHF THE PEOPLE TO ALTER OR ABOLISH IT, AND TO INSTITUTE NEW GOVERNMENT...
It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak whileeping to the sense of the original. The nearest one could come to doino would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word CRIMETHINK full translation could only be an ideological translation, wherebefferson's words would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government.
A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, already beinransformed in this way. Considerations of prestige made it desirable treserve the memory of certain historical figures, while at the same timringing their achievements into line with the philosophy of Ingsocarious writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Byron, Dickens, anome others were therefore in process of translation: when the task haeen completed, their original writings, with all else that survived ohe literature of the past, would be destroyed. These translations wer slow and difficult business, and it was not expected that they woule finished before the first or second decade of the twenty-firsentury. There were also large quantities of merely utilitariaiterature--indispensable technical manuals, and the like--that had te treated in the same way. It was chiefly in order to allow time fohe preliminary work of translation that the final adoption of Newspeaad been fixed for so late a date as 2050.