"Yes, of course, if it's fine tomorrow," said Mrs. Ramsay. "But you'lave to be up with the lark," she added.
To her son these words conveyed an extraordinary joy, as if it werettled, the expedition were bound to take place, and the wonder to whice had looked forward, for years and years it seemed, was, after a night'arkness and a day's sail, within touch. Since he belonged, even at thge of six, to that great clan which cannot keep this feeling separatrom that, but must let future prospects, with their joys and sorrowsloud what is actually at hand, since to such people even in earlieshildhood any turn in the wheel of sensation has the power to crystallisnd transfix the moment upon which its gloom or radiance rests, Jameamsay, sitting on the floor cutting out pictures from the illustrateatalogue of the Army and Navy stores, endowed the picture of efrigerator, as his mother spoke, with heavenly bliss. It was fringeith joy. The wheelbarrow, the lawnmower, the sound of poplar treeseaves whitening before rain, rooks cawing, brooms knocking, dresseustling--all these were so coloured and distinguished in his mind that had already his private code, his secret language, though he appeared thmage of stark and uncompromising severity, with his high forehead and hiierce blue eyes, impeccably candid and pure, frowning slightly at thight of human frailty, so that his mother, watching him guide hicissors neatly round the refrigerator, imagined him all red and ermine ohe Bench or directing a stern and momentous enterprise in some crisis oublic affairs.
"But," said his father, stopping in front of the drawing-room window, "ion't be fine."
Had there been an axe handy, a poker, or any weapon that would have gashe hole in his father's breast and killed him, there and then, James woulave seized it. Such were the extremes of emotion that Mr. Ramsay exciten his children's breasts by his mere presence; standing, as now, lean a knife, narrow as the blade of one, grinning sarcastically, not only withe pleasure of disillusioning his son and casting ridicule upon his wifeho was ten thousand times better in every way than he waJames thought), but also with some secret conceit at his own accuracy oudgement. What he said was true. It was always true. He was incapablf untruth; never tampered with a fact; never altered a disagreeable woro suit the pleasure or convenience of any mortal being, least of all ois own children, who, sprung from his loins, should be aware frohildhood that life is difficult; facts uncompromising; and the passage that fabled land where our brightest hopes are extinguished, our fraiarks founder in darkness (here Mr. Ramsay would straighten his back anarrow his little blue eyes upon the horizon), one that needs, above allourage, truth, and the power to endure.
"But it may be fine--I expect it will be fine," said Mrs. Ramsay, makinome little twist of the reddish brown stocking she was knittingmpatiently. If she finished it tonight, if they did go to the Lighthousfter all, it was to be given to the Lighthouse keeper for his little boyho was threatened with a tuberculous hip; together with a pile of olagazines, and some tobacco, indeed, whatever she could find lying aboutot really wanted, but only littering the room, to give those pooellows, who must be bored to death sitting all day with nothing to do buolish the lamp and trim the wick and rake about on their scrap of gardenomething to amuse them. For how would you like to be shut up for a wholonth at a time, and possibly more in stormy weather, upon a rock the sizf a tennis lawn? she would ask; and to have no letters or newspapers, ano see nobody; if you were married, not to see your wife, not to know hoour children were,--if they were ill, if they had fallen down and brokeheir legs or arms; to see the same dreary waves breaking week after weeknd then a dreadful storm coming, and the windows covered with spray, anirds dashed against the lamp, and the whole place rocking, and not bble to put your nose out of doors for fear of being swept into the seaow would you like that? she asked, addressing herself particularly to heaughters. So she added, rather differently, one must take them whateveomforts one can.
"It's due west," said the atheist Tansley, holding his bony fingers spreao that the wind blew through them, for he was sharing Mr. Ramsay'vening walk up and down, up and down the terrace. That is to say, thind blew from the worst possible direction for landing at the Lighthousees, he did say disagreeable things, Mrs. Ramsay admitted; it was odiouf him to rub this in, and make James still more disappointed; but at thame time, she would not let them laugh at him. "The atheist," thealled him; "the little atheist." Rose mocked him; Prue mocked himndrew, Jasper, Roger mocked him; even old Badger without a tooth in hiead had bit him, for being (as Nancy put it) the hundred and tenth younan to chase them all the way up to the Hebrides when it was ever so mucicer to be alone.
"Nonsense," said Mrs. Ramsay, with great severity. Apart from the habif exaggeration which they had from her, and from the implication (whicas true) that she asked too many people to stay, and had to lodge some ihe town, she could not bear incivility to her guests, to young men iarticular, who were poor as churchmice, "exceptionally able," her husbanaid, his great admirers, and come there for a holiday. Indeed, she hahe whole of the other sex under her protection; for reasons she could noxplain, for their chivalry and valour, for the fact that they negotiatereaties, ruled India, controlled finance; finally for an attitude towarderself which no woman could fail to feel or to find agreeable, somethinrustful, childlike, reverential; which an old woman could take from oung man without loss of dignity, and woe betide the girl--pray Heaven ias none of her daughters!--who did not feel the worth of it, and alhat it implied, to the marrow of her bones!
She turned with severity upon Nancy. He had not chased them, she saide had been asked.
They must find a way out of it all. There might be some simpler way, somess laborious way, she sighed. When she looked in the glass and saw heair grey, her cheek sunk, at fifty, she thought, possibly she might havanaged things better--her husband; money; his books. But for her owart she would never for a single second regret her decision, evadifficulties, or slur over duties. She was now formidable to behold, ant was only in silence, looking up from their plates, after she had spokeo severely about Charles Tansley, that her daughters, Prue, Nancyose--could sport with infidel ideas which they had brewed for themselvef a life different from hers; in Paris, perhaps; a wilder life; nolways taking care of some man or other; for there was in all their mind mute questioning of deference and chivalry, of the Bank of England anhe Indian Empire, of ringed fingers and lace, though to them all theras something in this of the essence of beauty, which called out thanliness in their girlish hearts, and made them, as they sat at tableneath their mother's eyes, honour her strange severity, her extremourtesy, like a queen's raising from the mud to wash a beggar's dirtoot, when she admonished them so very severely about that wretchetheist who had chased them--or, speaking accurately, been invited ttay with them--in the Isle of Skye.
"There'll be no landing at the Lighthouse tomorrow," said Charles Tansleylapping his hands together as he stood at the window with her husbandurely, he had said enough. She wished they would both leave her anames alone and go on talking. She looked at him. He was such iserable specimen, the children said, all humps and hollows. He couldn'lay cricket; he poked; he shuffled. He was a sarcastic brute, Andreaid. They knew what he liked best--to be for ever walking up and downp and down, with Mr. Ramsay, and saying who had won this, who had wohat, who was a "first rate man" at Latin verses, who was "brilliant but hink fundamentally unsound," who was undoubtedly the "ablest fellow ialliol," who had buried his light temporarily at Bristol or Bedford, buas bound to be heard of later when his Prolegomena, of which Mr. Tanslead the first pages in proof with him if Mr. Ramsay would like to sehem, to some branch of mathematics or philosophy saw the light of dayhat was what they talked about.
She could not help laughing herself sometimes. She said, the other dayomething about "waves mountains high." Yes, said Charles Tansley, ias a little rough. "Aren't you drenched to the skin?" she had saidDamp, not wet through," said Mr. Tansley, pinching his sleeve, feelinis socks.
But it was not that they minded, the children said. It was not his facet was not his manners. It was him--his point of view. When they talkebout something interesting, people, music, history, anything, even sait was a fine evening so why not sit out of doors, then what theomplained of about Charles Tansley was that until he had turned the wholhing round and made it somehow reflect himself and disparage them--he waot satisfied. And he would go to picture galleries they said, and hould ask one, did one like his tie? God knows, said Rose, one did not.
Disappearing as stealthily as stags from the dinner-table directly theal was over, the eight sons and daughters of Mr. and Mrs. Ramsay soughheir bedrooms, their fastness in a house where there was no other privaco debate anything, everything; Tansley's tie; the passing of the Reforill; sea birds and butterflies; people; while the sun poured into thosttics, which a plank alone separated from each other so that everootstep could be plainly heard and the Swiss girl sobbing for her fatheho was dying of cancer in a valley of the Grisons, and lit up batslannels, straw hats, ink-pots, paint-pots, beetles, and the skulls omall birds, while it drew from the long frilled strips of seaweed pinneo the wall a smell of salt and weeds, which was in the towels tooritty with sand from bathing.
Strife, divisions, difference of opinion, prejudices twisted into the veribre of being, oh, that they should begin so early, Mrs. Ramsay deploredhey were so critical, her children. They talked such nonsense. She wenrom the dining-room, holding James by the hand, since he would not gith the others. It seemed to her such nonsense--inventing differenceshen people, heaven knows, were different enough without that. The reaifferences, she thought, standing by the drawing-room window, are enoughuite enough. She had in mind at the moment, rich and poor, high and lowhe great in birth receiving from her, half grudging, some respect, foad she not in her veins the blood of that very noble, if slightlythical, Italian house, whose daughters, scattered about Englisrawing-rooms in the nineteenth century, had lisped so charmingly, hatormed so wildly, and all her wit and her bearing and her temper camrom them, and not from the sluggish English, or the cold Scotch; but morrofoundly, she ruminated the other problem, of rich and poor, and thhings she saw with her own eyes, weekly, daily, here or in London, whehe visited this widow, or that struggling wife in person with a bag oer arm, and a note-book and pencil with which she wrote down in columnarefully ruled for the purpose wages and spendings, employment annemployment, in the hope that thus she would cease to be a private womahose charity was half a sop to her own indignation, half a relief to hewn curiosity, and become what with her untrained mind she greatldmired, an investigator, elucidating the social problem.
Insoluble questions they were, it seemed to her, standing there, holdinames by the hand. He had followed her into the drawing-room, that younan they laughed at; he was standing by the table, fidgeting witomething, awkwardly, feeling himself out of things, as she knew withouooking round. They had all gone--the children; Minta Doyle and Pauayley; Augustus Carmichael; her husband--they had all gone. So shurned with a sigh and said, "Would it bore you to come with mer. Tansley?"
She had a dull errand in the town; she had a letter or two to write; should be ten minutes perhaps; she would put on her hat. And, with heasket and her parasol, there she was again, ten minutes later, giving ou sense of being ready, of being equipped for a jaunt, which, however, shust interrupt for a moment, as they passed the tennis lawn, to asr. Carmichael, who was basking with his yellow cat's eyes ajar, so thaike a cat's they seemed to reflect the branches moving or the cloudassing, but to give no inkling of any inner thoughts or emotiohatsoever, if he wanted anything.
For they were making the great expedition, she said, laughing. They weroing to the town. "Stamps, writing-paper, tobacco?" she suggestedtopping by his side. But no, he wanted nothing. His hands claspehemselves over his capacious paunch, his eyes blinked, as if he woulave liked to reply kindly to these blandishments (she was seductive but ittle nervous) but could not, sunk as he was in a grey-green somnolenchich embraced them all, without need of words, in a vast and benevolenethargy of well-wishing; all the house; all the world; all the people it, for he had slipped into his glass at lunch a few drops of somethinghich accounted, the children thought, for the vivid streak oanary-yellow in moustache and beard that were otherwise milk white. Noothing, he murmured.
He should have been a great philosopher, said Mrs. Ramsay, as they wenown the road to the fishing village, but he had made an unfortunatarriage. Holding her black parasol very erect, and moving with andescribable air of expectation, as if she were going to meet some onound the corner, she told the story; an affair at Oxford with some girln early marriage; poverty; going to India; translating a little poetrvery beautifully, I believe," being willing to teach the boys Persian oindustanee, but what really was the use of that?--and then lying, as theaw him, on the lawn.
It flattered him; snubbed as he had been, it soothed him that Mrs. Ramsahould tell him this. Charles Tansley revived. Insinuating, too, as shid the greatness of man's intellect, even in its decay, the subjection oll wives--not that she blamed the girl, and the marriage had been happnough, she believed--to their husband's labours, she made him feel betteleased with himself than he had done yet, and he would have liked, hahey taken a cab, for example, to have paid the fare. As for her littlag, might he not carry that? No, no, she said, she always carried THAerself. She did too. Yes, he felt that in her. He felt many thingsomething in particular that excited him and disturbed him for reasonhich he could not give. He would like her to see him, gowned and hoodedalking in a procession. A fellowship, a professorship, he felt capablf anything and saw himself--but what was she looking at? At a maasting a bill. The vast flapping sheet flattened itself out, and eachove of the brush revealed fresh legs, hoops, horses, glistening reds anlues, beautifully smooth, until half the wall was covered with thdvertisement of a circus; a hundred horsemen, twenty performing sealsions, tigers ... Craning forwards, for she was short-sighted, she read iut ... "will visit this town," she read. It was terribly dangerous woror a one-armed man, she exclaimed, to stand on top of a ladder likhat--his left arm had been cut off in a reaping machine two years ago.
"Let us all go!" she cried, moving on, as if all those riders and horsead filled her with childlike exultation and made her forget her pity.
"Let's go," he said, repeating her words, clicking them out, however, wit self-consciousness that made her wince. "Let us all go to the circus.o. He could not say it right. He could not feel it right. But why nothe wondered. What was wrong with him then? She liked him warmly, at thoment. Had they not been taken, she asked, to circuses when they werhildren? Never, he answered, as if she asked the very thing he wantedad been longing all these days to say, how they did not go to circusest was a large family, nine brothers and sisters, and his father was orking man. "My father is a chemist, Mrs. Ramsay. He keeps a shop." Himself had paid his own way since he was thirteen. Often he went withou greatcoat in winter. He could never "return hospitality" (those weris parched stiff words) at college. He had to make things last twice thime other people did; he smoked the cheapest tobacco; shag; the same thld men did in the quays. He worked hard--seven hours a day; his subjecas now the influence of something upon somebody--they were walking on anrs. Ramsay did not quite catch the meaning, only the words, here anhere ... dissertation ... fellowship ... readership ... lectureship. Should not follow the ugly academic jargon, that rattled itself off slibly, but said to herself that she saw now why going to the circus hanocked him off his perch, poor little man, and why he came outnstantly, with all that about his father and mother and brothers anisters, and she would see to it that they didn't laugh at him any morehe would tell Prue about it. What he would have liked, she supposedould have been to say how he had gone not to the circus but to Ibsen withe Ramsays. He was an awful prig--oh yes, an insufferable bore. Forhough they had reached the town now and were in the main street, witarts grinding past on the cobbles, still he went on talking, abouettlements, and teaching, and working men, and helping our own classnd lectures, till she gathered that he had got back entirelf-confidence, had recovered from the circus, and was about (and nogain she liked him warmly) to tell her--but here, the houses fallinway on both sides, they came out on the quay, and the whole bapread before them and Mrs. Ramsay could not help exclaiming, "Ohow beautiful!" For the great plateful of blue water was before herhe hoary Lighthouse, distant, austere, in the midst; and on the rights far as the eye could see, fading and falling, in soft low pleatshe green sand dunes with the wild flowing grasses on them, which alwayeemed to be running away into some moon country, uninhabited of men.
That was the view, she said, stopping, growing greyer-eyed, that heusband loved.
She paused a moment. But now, she said, artists had come here. Therndeed, only a few paces off, stood one of them, in Panama hat and yellooots, seriously, softly, absorbedly, for all that he was watched by teittle boys, with an air of profound contentment on his round red facazing, and then, when he had gazed, dipping; imbuing the tip of hirush in some soft mound of green or pink. Since Mr. Paunceforte had beehere, three years before, all the pictures were like that, she saidreen and grey, with lemon-coloured sailing-boats, and pink women on theach.
But her grandmother's friends, she said, glancing discreetly as theassed, took the greatest pains; first they mixed their own colours, anhen they ground them, and then they put damp cloths to keep them moist.
So Mr. Tansley supposed she meant him to see that that man's picture wakimpy, was that what one said? The colours weren't solid? Was that whane said? Under the influence of that extraordinary emotion which had beerowing all the walk, had begun in the garden when he had wanted to taker bag, had increased in the town when he had wanted to tell heverything about himself, he was coming to see himself, and everything had ever known gone crooked a little. It was awfully strange.
There he stood in the parlour of the poky little house where she had takeim, waiting for her, while she went upstairs a moment to see a woman. Heard her quick step above; heard her voice cheerful, then low; looked ahe mats, tea-caddies, glass shades; waited quite impatiently; lookeorward eagerly to the walk home; determined to carry her bag; then hearer come out; shut a door; say they must keep the windows open and thoors shut, ask at the house for anything they wanted (she must be talkino a child) when, suddenly, in she came, stood for a moment silent (as ihe had been pretending up there, and for a moment let herself be now)tood quite motionless for a moment against a picture of Queen Victoriearing the blue ribbon of the Garter; when all at once he realised that was this: it was this:--she was the most beautiful person he had eveeen.
With stars in her eyes and veils in her hair, with cyclamen and wiliolets--what nonsense was he thinking? She was fifty at least; she haight children. Stepping through fields of flowers and taking to hereast buds that had broken and lambs that had fallen; with the stars ier eyes and the wind in her hair--He had hold of her bag.
"Good-bye, Elsie," she said, and they walked up the street, she holdiner parasol erect and walking as if she expected to meet some one rounhe corner, while for the first time in his life Charles Tansley felt axtraordinary pride; a man digging in a drain stopped digging and looket her, let his arm fall down and looked at her; for the first time in hiife Charles Tansley felt an extraordinary pride; felt the wind and thyclamen and the violets for he was walking with a beautiful woman. Had hold of her bag.
2
"No going to the Lighthouse, James," he said, as trying in deference trs. Ramsay to soften his voice into some semblance of geniality at least.
Odious little man, thought Mrs. Ramsay, why go on saying that?
3
"Perhaps you will wake up and find the sun shining and the birds singing,he said compassionately, smoothing the little boy's hair, for heusband, with his caustic saying that it would not be fine, had dashed hipirits she could see. This going to the Lighthouse was a passion of hishe saw, and then, as if her husband had not said enough, with his caustiaying that it would not be fine tomorrow, this odious little man went anubbed it in all over again.
"Perhaps it will be fine tomorrow," she said, smoothing his hair.
All she could do now was to admire the refrigerator, and turn the pages ohe Stores list in the hope that she might come upon something like ake, or a mowing-machine, which, with its prongs and its handles, wouleed the greatest skill and care in cutting out. All these young mearodied her husband, she reflected; he said it would rain; they said iould be a positive tornado.
But here, as she turned the page, suddenly her search for the picture of ake or a mowing-machine was interrupted. The gruff murmur, irregularlroken by the taking out of pipes and the putting in of pipes which haept on assuring her, though she could not hear what was said (as she san the window which opened on the terrace), that the men were happilalking; this sound, which had lasted now half an hour and had taken itlace soothingly in the scale of sounds pressing on top of her, such ahe tap of balls upon bats, the sharp, sudden bark now and thenHow's that? How's that?" of the children playing cricket, had ceasedo that the monotonous fall of the waves on the beach, which for the mosart beat a measured and soothing tattoo to her thoughts and seemeonsolingly to repeat over and over again as she sat with the childrehe words of some old cradle song, murmured by nature, "I am guardinou--I am your support," but at other times suddenly and unexpectedlyspecially when her mind raised itself slightly from the task actually iand, had no such kindly meaning, but like a ghostly roll of drumemorselessly beat the measure of life, made one think of the destructiof the island and its engulfment in the sea, and warned her whose day halipped past in one quick doing after another that it was all ephemeral a rainbow--this sound which had been obscured and concealed under thther sounds suddenly thundered hollow in her ears and made her look uith an impulse of terror.
They had ceased to talk; that was the explanation. Falling in one seconrom the tension which had gripped her to the other extreme which, as io recoup her for her unnecessary expense of emotion, was cool, amusednd even faintly malicious, she concluded that poor Charles Tansley haeen shed. That was of little account to her. If her husband requireacrifices (and indeed he did) she cheerfully offered up to him Charleansley, who had snubbed her little boy.
One moment more, with her head raised, she listened, as if she waited foome habitual sound, some regular mechanical sound; and then, hearinomething rhythmical, half said, half chanted, beginning in the garden, aer husband beat up and down the terrace, something between a croak and ong, she was soothed once more, assured again that all was well, anooking down at the book on her knee found the picture of a pocket knifith six blades which could only be cut out if James was very careful.
Suddenly a loud cry, as of a sleep-walker, half roused, something about
Stormed at with shot and shell
sung out with the utmost intensity in her ear, made her turpprehensively to see if anyone had heard him. Only Lily Briscoe, she walad to find; and that did not matter. But the sight of the girl standinn the edge of the lawn painting reminded her; she was supposed to beeping her head as much in the same position as possible for Lily'icture. Lily's picture! Mrs. Ramsay smiled. With her little Chinesyes and her puckered-up face, she would never marry; one could not taker painting very seriously; she was an independent little creature, anrs. Ramsay liked her for it; so, remembering her promise, she bent heead.
4
Indeed, he almost knocked her easel over, coming down upon her with hiands waving shouting out, "Boldly we rode and well," but, mercifully, hurned sharp, and rode off, to die gloriously she supposed upon theights of Balaclava. Never was anybody at once so ridiculous and slarming. But so long as he kept like that, waving, shouting, she waafe; he would not stand still and look at her picture. And that was whaily Briscoe could not have endured. Even while she looked at the masst the line, at the colour, at Mrs. Ramsay sitting in the window witames, she kept a feeler on her surroundings lest some one should creep, and suddenly she should find her picture looked at. But now, with aler senses quickened as they were, looking, straining, till the colour ohe wall and the jacmanna beyond burnt into her eyes, she was aware oomeone coming out of the house, coming towards her; but somehow divinedrom the footfall, William Bankes, so that though her brush quivered, shid not, as she would have done had it been Mr. Tansley, Paul Rayleyinta Doyle, or practically anybody else, turn her canvas upon the grassut let it stand. William Bankes stood beside her.
They had rooms in the village, and so, walking in, walking out, partinate on door-mats, had said little things about the soup, about thhildren, about one thing and another which made them allies; so that whee stood beside her now in his judicial way (he was old enough to be heather too, a botanist, a widower, smelling of soap, very scrupulous anlean) she just stood there. He just stood there. Her shoes werxcellent, he observed. They allowed the toes their natural expansionodging in the same house with her, he had noticed too, how orderly shas, up before breakfast and off to paint, he believed, alone: poorresumably, and without the complexion or the allurement of Miss Doylertainly, but with a good sense which made her in his eyes superior that young lady. Now, for instance, when Ramsay bore down on themhouting, gesticulating, Miss Briscoe, he felt certain, understood.
Some one had blundered.
Mr. Ramsay glared at them. He glared at them without seeming to see themhat did make them both vaguely uncomfortable. Together they had seen hing they had not been meant to see. They had encroached upon a privacyo, Lily thought, it was probably an excuse of his for moving, for gettinut of earshot, that made Mr. Bankes almost immediately say somethinbout its being chilly and suggested taking a stroll. She would comees. But it was with difficulty that she took her eyes off her picture.
The jacmanna was bright violet; the wall staring white. She would noave considered it honest to tamper with the bright violet and the starinhite, since she saw them like that, fashionable though it was, sincr. Paunceforte's visit, to see everything pale, elegant, semitransparenthen beneath the colour there was the shape. She could see it all slearly, so commandingly, when she looked: it was when she took her brusn hand that the whole thing changed. It was in that moment's flighetween the picture and her canvas that the demons set on her who ofterought her to the verge of tears and made this passage from conception tork as dreadful as any down a dark passage for a child. Such she ofteelt herself--struggling against terrific odds to maintain her courage; tay: "But this is what I see; this is what I see," and so to clasp somiserable remnant of her vision to her breast, which a thousand forces diheir best to pluck from her. And it was then too, in that chill anindy way, as she began to paint, that there forced themselves upon hether things, her own inadequacy, her insignificance, keeping house foer father off the Brompton Road, and had much ado to control her impulso fling herself (thank Heaven she had always resisted so far) ars. Ramsay's knee and say to her--but what could one say to her? "I'm iove with you?" No, that was not true. "I'm in love with this all,aving her hand at the hedge, at the house, at the children. It wabsurd, it was impossible. So now she laid her brushes neatly in the boxide by side, and said to William Bankes:
"It suddenly gets cold. The sun seems to give less heat," she saidooking about her, for it was bright enough, the grass still a soft deereen, the house starred in its greenery with purple passion flowers, anooks dropping cool cries from the high blue. But something movedlashed, turned a silver wing in the air. It was September after allhe middle of September, and past six in the evening. So off thetrolled down the garden in the usual direction, past the tennis lawnast the pampas grass, to that break in the thick hedge, guarded by reot pokers like brasiers of clear burning coal, between which the bluaters of the bay looked bluer than ever.
They came there regularly every evening drawn by some need. It was as ihe water floated off and set sailing thoughts which had grown stagnant ory land, and gave to their bodies even some sort of physical reliefirst, the pulse of colour flooded the bay with blue, and the hearxpanded with it and the body swam, only the next instant to be checkend chilled by the prickly blackness on the ruffled waves. Then, uehind the great black rock, almost every evening spurted irregularly, shat one had to watch for it and it was a delight when it came, a fountaif white water; and then, while one waited for that, one watched, on thale semicircular beach, wave after wave shedding again and agaimoothly, a film of mother of pearl.
They both smiled, standing there. They both felt a common hilarityxcited by the moving waves; and then by the swift cutting race of ailing boat, which, having sliced a curve in the bay, stopped; shiveredet its sails drop down; and then, with a natural instinct to complete thicture, after this swift movement, both of them looked at the dunear away, and instead of merriment felt come over them somadness--because the thing was completed partly, and partly becausistant views seem to outlast by a million years (Lily thought) the gazend to be communing already with a sky which beholds an earth entirelt rest.
Looking at the far sand hills, William Bankes thought of Ramsay: thoughf a road in Westmorland, thought of Ramsay striding along a road bimself hung round with that solitude which seemed to be his natural airut this was suddenly interrupted, William Bankes remembered (and thiust refer to some actual incident), by a hen, straddling her wings out irotection of a covey of little chicks, upon which Ramsay, stoppingointed his stick and said "Pretty--pretty," an odd illumination in tis heart, Bankes had thought it, which showed his simplicity, hiympathy with humble things; but it seemed to him as if their friendshiad ceased, there, on that stretch of road. After that, Ramsay haarried. After that, what with one thing and another, the pulp had gonut of their friendship. Whose fault it was he could not say, only, afte time, repetition had taken the place of newness. It was to repeat thahey met. But in this dumb colloquy with the sand dunes he maintainehat his affection for Ramsay had in no way diminished; but there, likhe body of a young man laid up in peat for a century, with the red fresn his lips, was his friendship, in its acuteness and reality, laid ucross the bay among the sandhills.
He was anxious for the sake of this friendship and perhaps too in order tlear himself in his own mind from the imputation of having dried anhrunk--for Ramsay lived in a welter of children, whereas Bankes wahildless and a widower--he was anxious that Lily Briscoe should noisparage Ramsay (a great man in his own way) yet should understand hohings stood between them. Begun long years ago, their friendship haetered out on a Westmorland road, where the hen spread her wings beforer chicks; after which Ramsay had married, and their paths lyinifferent ways, there had been, certainly for no one's fault, somendency, when they met, to repeat.
Yes. That was it. He finished. He turned from the view. And, turnino walk back the other way, up the drive, Mr. Bankes was alive to thinghich would not have struck him had not those sandhills revealed to hihe body of his friendship lying with the red on its lips laid up ieat--for instance, Cam, the little girl, Ramsay's youngest daughter. Shas picking Sweet Alice on the bank. She was wild and fierce. She woulot "give a flower to the gentleman" as the nursemaid told hero! no! no! she would not! She clenched her fist. She stamped. Anr. Bankes felt aged and saddened and somehow put into the wrong by hebout his friendship. He must have dried and shrunk.
The Ramsays were not rich, and it was a wonder how they managed tontrive it all. Eight children! To feed eight children on philosophyere was another of them, Jasper this time, strolling past, to have a shot a bird, he said, nonchalantly, swinging Lily's hand like a pump-handls he passed, which caused Mr. Bankes to say, bitterly, how SHE was avourite. There was education now to be considered (true, Mrs. Ramsaad something of her own perhaps) let alone the daily wear and tear ohoes and stockings which those "great fellows," all well grown, angularuthless youngsters, must require. As for being sure which was which, on what order they came, that was beyond him. He called them privatelfter the Kings and Queens of England; Cam the Wicked, James the Ruthlessndrew the Just, Prue the Fair--for Prue would have beauty, he thoughtow could she help it?--and Andrew brains. While he walked up the drivnd Lily Briscoe said yes and no and capped his comments (for she was iove with them all, in love with this world) he weighed Ramsay's caseommiserated him, envied him, as if he had seen him divest himself of alhose glories of isolation and austerity which crowned him in youth tumber himself definitely with fluttering wings and cluckinomesticities. They gave him something--William Bankes acknowledged thatt would have been pleasant if Cam had stuck a flower in his coat olambered over his shoulder, as over her father's, to look at a picturf Vesuvius in eruption; but they had also, his old friends could not bueel, destroyed something. What would a stranger think now? What dihis Lily Briscoe think? Could one help noticing that habits grew on himccentricities, weaknesses perhaps? It was astonishing that a man of hintellect could stoop so low as he did--but that was too harsh hrase--could depend so much as he did upon people's praise.
"Oh, but," said Lily, "think of his work!"
Whenever she "thought of his work" she always saw clearly before her arge kitchen table. It was Andrew's doing. She asked him what hiather's books were about. "Subject and object and the nature oeality," Andrew had said. And when she said Heavens, she had no notiohat that meant. "Think of a kitchen table then," he told her, "wheou're not there."
So now she always saw, when she thought of Mr. Ramsay's work, a scrubbeitchen table. It lodged now in the fork of a pear tree, for they haeached the orchard. And with a painful effort of concentration, shocused her mind, not upon the silver-bossed bark of the tree, or upon itish-shaped leaves, but upon a phantom kitchen table, one of thoscrubbed board tables, grained and knotted, whose virtue seems to haveen laid bare by years of muscular integrity, which stuck there, its fouegs in air. Naturally, if one's days were passed in this seeing ongular essences, this reducing of lovely evenings, with all theilamingo clouds and blue and silver to a white deal four-legged tabland it was a mark of the finest minds to do so), naturally one could noe judged like an ordinary person.
Mr. Bankes liked her for bidding him "think of his work." He had thoughf it, often and often. Times without number, he had said, "Ramsay is onf those men who do their best work before they are forty." He had made efinite contribution to philosophy in one little book when he was onlive and twenty; what came after was more or less amplificationepetition. But the number of men who make a definite contribution tnything whatsoever is very small, he said, pausing by the pear tree, welrushed, scrupulously exact, exquisitely judicial. Suddenly, as if thovement of his hand had released it, the load of her accumulatempressions of him tilted up, and down poured in a ponderous avalanche alhe felt about him. That was one sensation. Then up rose in a fume thssence of his being. That was another. She felt herself transfixey the intensity of her perception; it was his severity; his goodness. espect you (she addressed silently him in person) in every atom; you arot vain; you are entirely impersonal; you are finer than Mr. Ramsay; yore the finest human being that I know; you have neither wife nor chilwithout any sexual feeling, she longed to cherish that loneliness), yoive for science (involuntarily, sections of potatoes rose before heyes); praise would be an insult to you; generous, pure-hearted, heroian! But simultaneously, she remembered how he had brought a valet alhe way up here; objected to dogs on chairs; would prose for hours (untir. Ramsay slammed out of the room) about salt in vegetables and thniquity of English cooks.
How then did it work out, all this? How did one judge people, think ohem? How did one add up this and that and conclude that it was likinne felt or disliking? And to those words, what meaning attached, aftell? Standing now, apparently transfixed, by the pear tree, impressionoured in upon her of those two men, and to follow her thought was likollowing a voice which speaks too quickly to be taken down by one'encil, and the voice was her own voice saying without promptinndeniable, everlasting, contradictory things, so that even thissures and humps on the bark of the pear tree were irrevocablixed there for eternity. You have greatness, she continued, bur. Ramsay has none of it. He is petty, selfish, vain, egotistical; he ipoilt; he is a tyrant; he wears Mrs. Ramsay to death; but he has what yoshe addressed Mr. Bankes) have not; a fiery unworldliness; he knowothing about trifles; he loves dogs and his children. He has eightr. Bankes has none. Did he not come down in two coats the other nighnd let Mrs. Ramsay trim his hair into a pudding basin? All of thianced up and down, like a company of gnats, each separate but alarvellously controlled in an invisible elastic net--danced up and down iily's mind, in and about the branches of the pear tree, where still hunn effigy the scrubbed kitchen table, symbol of her profound respect for. Ramsay's mind, until her thought which had spun quicker and quickexploded of its own intensity; she felt released; a shot went off close aand, and there came, flying from its fragments, frightened, effusiveumultuous, a flock of starlings.
"Jasper!" said Mr. Bankes. They turned the way the starlings flew, ovehe terrace. Following the scatter of swift-flying birds in the sky thetepped through the gap in the high hedge straight into Mr. Ramsay, whoomed tragically at them, "Some one had blundered!"
His eyes, glazed with emotion, defiant with tragic intensity, met theiror a second, and trembled on the verge of recognition; but then, raisinis hand, half-way to his face as if to avert, to brush off, in an agonf peevish shame, their normal gaze, as if he begged them to withhold fo moment what he knew to be inevitable, as if he impressed upon them hiwn child-like resentment of interruption, yet even in the moment oiscovery was not to be routed utterly, but was determined to hold fast tomething of this delicious emotion, this impure rhapsody of which he washamed, but in which he revelled--he turned abruptly, slammed his privatoor on them; and, Lily Briscoe and Mr. Bankes, looking uneasily up inthe sky, observed that the flock of starlings which Jasper had routed witis gun had settled on the tops of the elm trees.
5
"And even if it isn't fine tomorrow," said Mrs. Ramsay, raising her eyeo glance at William Bankes and Lily Briscoe as they passed, "it will bnother day. And now," she said, thinking that Lily's charm was hehinese eyes, aslant in her white, puckered little face, but it would tak clever man to see it, "and now stand up, and let me measure your leg,or they might go to the Lighthouse after all, and she must see if thtocking did not need to be an inch or two longer in the leg.
Smiling, for it was an admirable idea, that had flashed upon her this verecond--William and Lily should marry--she took the heather-mixturtocking, with its criss-cross of steel needles at the mouth of it, aneasured it against James's leg.
"My dear, stand still," she said, for in his jealousy, not liking to servs measuring block for the Lighthouse keeper's little boy, James fidgeteurposely; and if he did that, how could she see, was it too long, was ioo short? she asked.
She looked up--what demon possessed him, her youngest, her cherished?--anaw the room, saw the chairs, thought them fearfully shabby. Theintrails, as Andrew said the other day, were all over the floor; but thehat was the point, she asked, of buying good chairs to let them spoil uere all through the winter when the house, with only one old woman to seo it, positively dripped with wet? Never mind, the rent was preciselwopence half-penny; the children loved it; it did her husband good to bhree thousand, or if she must be accurate, three hundred miles from hiibraries and his lectures and his disciples; and there was room foisitors. Mats, camp beds, crazy ghosts of chairs and tables whose Londoife of service was done--they did well enough here; and a photograph owo, and books. Books, she thought, grew of themselves. She never haime to read them. Alas! even the books that had been given her annscribed by the hand of the poet himself: "For her whose wishes must bbeyed" ... "The happier Helen of our days" ... disgraceful to say, shad never read them. And Croom on the Mind and Bates on the Savagustoms of Polynesia ("My dear, stand still," she said)--neither of thosould one send to the Lighthouse. At a certain moment, she supposed, thouse would become so shabby that something must be done. If they coule taught to wipe their feet and not bring the beach in with them--thaould be something. Crabs, she had to allow, if Andrew really wished tissect them, or if Jasper believed that one could make soup from seaweedne could not prevent it; or Rose's objects--shells, reeds, stones; fohey were gifted, her children, but all in quite different ways. And thesult of it was, she sighed, taking in the whole room from floor teiling, as she held the stocking against James's leg, that things gohabbier and got shabbier summer after summer. The mat was fading; thall-paper was flapping. You couldn't tell any more that those were rosen it. Still, if every door in a house is left perpetually open, and nockmaker in the whole of Scotland can mend a bolt, things must spoilhat was the use of flinging a green Cashemere shawl over the edge o picture frame? In two weeks it would be the colour of pea souput it was the doors that annoyed her; every door was left openhe listened. The drawing-room door was open; the hall door was opent sounded as if the bedroom doors were open; and certainly the windon the landing was open, for that she had opened herself. That windowhould be open, and doors shut--simple as it was, could none of theemember it? She would go into the maids' bedrooms at night and finhem sealed like ovens, except for Marie's, the Swiss girl, whould rather go without a bath than without fresh air, but thet home, she had said, "the mountains are so beautiful." She had saihat last night looking out of the window with tears in her eyesThe mountains are so beautiful." Her father was dying therers. Ramsay knew. He was leaving them fatherless. Scolding anemonstrating (how to make a bed, how to open a window, with hands thahut and spread like a Frenchwoman's) all had folded itself quietly abouer, when the girl spoke, as, after a flight through the sunshine things of a bird fold themselves quietly and the blue of its plumaghanges from bright steel to soft purple. She had stood there silent fohere was nothing to be said. He had cancer of the throat. At thecolection--how she had stood there, how the girl had said, "At home thountains are so beautiful," and there was no hope, no hope whatever, shad a spasm of irritation, and speaking sharply, said to James:
"Stand still. Don't be tiresome," so that he knew instantly that heeverity was real, and straightened his leg and she measured it.
The stocking was too short by half an inch at least, making allowance fohe fact that Sorley's little boy would be less well grown than James.
"It's too short," she said, "ever so much too short."
Never did anybody look so sad. Bitter and black, half-way down, in tharkness, in the shaft which ran from the sunlight to the depths, perhap tear formed; a tear fell; the waters swayed this way and that, receivet, and were at rest. Never did anybody look so sad.
But was it nothing but looks, people said? What was there behind it--heeauty and splendour? Had he blown his brains out, they asked, had hied the week before they were married--some other, earlier lover, of whoumours reached one? Or was there nothing? nothing but an incomparableauty which she lived behind, and could do nothing to disturb? Foasily though she might have said at some moment of intimacy when storief great passion, of love foiled, of ambition thwarted came her way hohe too had known or felt or been through it herself, she never spokehe was silent always. She knew then--she knew without having learnter simplicity fathomed what clever people falsified. Her singleness oind made her drop plumb like a stone, alight exact as a bird, gave heraturally, this swoop and fall of the spirit upon truth which delightedased, sustained--falsely perhaps.
("Nature has but little clay," said Mr. Bankes once, much moved by heoice on the telephone, though she was only telling him a fact about rain, "like that of which she moulded you." He saw her at the end of thine, Greek, blue-eyed, straight-nosed. How incongruous it seemed to belephoning to a woman like that. The Graces assembling seemed to havoined hands in meadows of asphodel to compose that face. Yes, he woulatch the 10:30 at Euston.
"But she's no more aware of her beauty than a child," said Mr. Bankeseplacing the receiver and crossing the room to see what progress thorkmen were making with an hotel which they were building at the back ois house. And he thought of Mrs. Ramsay as he looked at that stir amonhe unfinished walls. For always, he thought, there was somethinncongruous to be worked into the harmony of her face. She clapped eer-stalker's hat on her head; she ran across the lawn in galoshes tnatch a child from mischief. So that if it was her beauty merely thane thought of, one must remember the quivering thing, the living thinthey were carrying bricks up a little plank as he watched them), and wort into the picture; or if one thought of her simply as a woman, one musndow her with some freak of idiosyncrasy--she did not like admiration--ouppose some latent desire to doff her royalty of form as if her beautored her and all that men say of beauty, and she wanted only to be likther people, insignificant. He did not know. He did not know. He muso to his work.)
Knitting her reddish-brown hairy stocking, with her head outlined absurdly the gilt frame, the green shawl which she had tossed over the edge ohe frame, and the authenticated masterpiece by Michael Angelors. Ramsay smoothed out what had been harsh in her manner a momenefore, raised his head, and kissed her little boy on the foreheadLet us find another picture to cut out," she said.
6
But what had happened?
Some one had blundered.
Starting from her musing she gave meaning to words which she had heleaningless in her mind for a long stretch of time. "Some one halundered"--Fixing her short-sighted eyes upon her husband, who was noearing down upon her, she gazed steadily until his closeness revealed ter (the jingle mated itself in her head) that something had happenedome one had blundered. But she could not for the life of her think what.
He shivered; he quivered. All his vanity, all his satisfaction in his owplendour, riding fell as a thunderbolt, fierce as a hawk at the head ois men through the valley of death, had been shattered, destroyedtormed at by shot and shell, boldly we rode and well, flashed through thalley of death, volleyed and thundered--straight into Lily Briscoe anilliam Bankes. He quivered; he shivered.
Not for the world would she have spoken to him, realising, from thamiliar signs, his eyes averted, and some curious gathering togethef his person, as if he wrapped himself about and needed privacy inthich to regain his equilibrium, that he was outraged and anguished. Shtroked James's head; she transferred to him what she felt for heusband, and, as she watched him chalk yellow the white dress shirt of entleman in the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, thought what a delight iould be to her should he turn out a great artist; and why should he note had a splendid forehead. Then, looking up, as her husband passed hence more, she was relieved to find that the ruin was veiled; domesticitriumphed; custom crooned its soothing rhythm, so that when stoppineliberately, as his turn came round again, at the window he benuizzically and whimsically to tickle James's bare calf with a sprig oomething, she twitted him for having dispatched "that poor young man,harles Tansley. Tansley had had to go in and write his dissertatione said.
"James will have to write HIS dissertation one of these days," he adderonically, flicking his sprig.
Hating his father, James brushed away the tickling spray with which in anner peculiar to him, compound of severity and humour, he teased hioungest son's bare leg.
She was trying to get these tiresome stockings finished to send torley's little boy tomorrow, said Mrs. Ramsay.
There wasn't the slightest possible chance that they could go to thighthouse tomorrow, Mr. Ramsay snapped out irascibly.
How did he know? she asked. The wind often changed.
The extraordinary irrationality of her remark, the folly of women's mindnraged him. He had ridden through the valley of death, been shatterend shivered; and now, she flew in the face of facts, made his childreope what was utterly out of the question, in effect, told lies. Htamped his foot on the stone step. "Damn you," he said. But what had shaid? Simply that it might be fine tomorrow. So it might.
Not with the barometer falling and the wind due west.
To pursue truth with such astonishing lack of consideration for otheeople's feelings, to rendthe thin veils of civilization so wantonly, srutally, was to her so horrible an outrage of human decency that, withoueplying, dazed and blinded, she bent her head as if to let the pelt oagged hail, the drench of dirty water, bespatter her unrebuked. Theras nothing to be said.
He stood by her in silence. Very humbly, at length, he said that he woultep over and ask the Coastguards if she liked.
There was nobody whom she reverenced as she reverenced him.
She was quite ready to take his word for it, she said. Only then theeed not cut sandwiches--that was all. They came to her, naturally, sinche was a woman, all day long with this and that; one wanting thisnother that; the children were growing up; she often felt she was nothinut a sponge sopped full of human emotions. Then he said, Damn you. Haid, It must rain. He said, It won't rain; and instantly a Heaven oecurity opened before her. There was nobody she reverenced more. Shas not good enough to tie his shoe strings, she felt.
Already ashamed of that petulance, of that gesticulation of the hands wheharging at the head of his troops, Mr. Ramsay rather sheepishly proddeis son's bare legs once more, and then, as if he had her leave for itith a movement which oddly reminded his wife of the great sea lion at thoo tumbling backwards after swallowing his fish and walloping off so thahe water in the tank washes from side to side, he dived into the eveninir which, already thinner, was taking the substance from leaves anedges but, as if in return, restoring to roses and pinks a lustre whichey had not had by day.
"Some one had blundered," he said again, striding off, up and down therrace.
But how extraordinarily his note had changed! It was like the cuckooin June he gets out of tune"; as if he were trying over, tentativeleeking, some phrase for a new mood, and having only this at hand, uset, cracked though it was. But it sounded ridiculous--"Some one halundered"--said like that, almost as a question, without any convictionelodiously. Mrs. Ramsay could not help smiling, and soon, sure enoughalking up and down, he hummed it, dropped it, fell silent.
He was safe, he was restored to his privacy. He stopped to light hiipe, looked once at his wife and son in the window, and as one raisene's eyes from a page in an express train and sees a farm, a tree, luster of cottages as an illustration, a confirmation of something on thrinted page to which one returns, fortified, and satisfied, so withouis distinguishing either his son or his wife, the sight of them fortifieim and satisfied him and consecrated his effort to arrive at a perfectllear understanding of the problem which now engaged the energies of hiplendid mind.
It was a splendid mind. For if thought is like the keyboard of a pianoivided into so many notes, or like the alphabet is ranged in twenty-sietters all in order, then his splendid mind had no sort of difficultn running over those letters one by one, firmly and accurately, untit had reached, say, the letter Q. He reached Q. Very few people ihe whole of England ever reach Q. Here, stopping for one momeny the stone urn which held the geraniums, he saw, but now far, faway, like children picking up shells, divinely innocent and occupied witittle trifles at their feet and somehow entirely defenceless against oom which he perceived, his wife and son, together, in the window. Theeeded his protection; he gave it them. But after Q? What comes nextfter Q there are a number of letters the last of which is scarcelisible to mortal eyes, but glimmers red in the distance. Z is onleached once by one man in a generation. Still, if he could reach R iould be something. Here at least was Q. He dug his heels in at Q. Q has sure of. Q he could demonstrate. If Q then is Q--R--. Here hnocked his pipe out, with two or three resonant taps on the handle of thrn, and proceeded. "Then R ..." He braced himself. He clencheimself.
Qualities that would have saved a ship's company exposed on a broilinea with six biscuits and a flask of water--endurance and justiceoresight, devotion, skill, came to his help. R is then--what is R?
A shutter, like the leathern eyelid of a lizard, flickered over thntensity of his gaze and obscured the letter R. In that flash oarkness he heard people saying--he was a failure--that R was beyond hime would never reach R. On to R, once more. R--
Qualities that in a desolate expedition across the icy solitudes of tholar region would have made him the leader, the guide, the counsellorhose temper, neither sanguine nor despondent, surveys with equanimithat is to be and faces it, came to his help again. R--
The lizard's eye flickered once more. The veins on his forehead bulgedhe geranium in the urn became startlingly visible and, displayed amonts leaves, he could see, without wishing it, that old, that obviouistinction between the two classes of men; on the one hand the steadoers of superhuman strength who, plodding and persevering, repeat thhole alphabet in order, twenty-six letters in all, from start to finishn the other the gifted, the inspired who, miraculously, lump all thetters together in one flash--the way of genius. He had not genius; haid no claim to that: but he had, or might have had, the power to repeavery letter of the alphabet from A to Z accurately in order. Meanwhilee stuck at Q. On, then, on to R.
Feelings that would not have disgraced a leader who, now that the snow haegun to fall and the mountain top is covered in mist, knows that he musay himself down and die before morning comes, stole upon him, paling tholour of his eyes, giving him, even in the two minutes of his turn ohe terrace, the bleached look of withered old age. Yet he would not diying down; he would find some crag of rock, and there, his eyes fixen the storm, trying to the end to pierce the darkness, he would ditanding. He would never reach R.
He stood stock-still, by the urn, with the geranium flowing over it. Hoany men in a thousand million, he asked himself, reach Z after allurely the leader of a forlorn hope may ask himself that, and answerithout treachery to the expedition behind him, "One perhaps." One in eneration. Is he to be blamed then if he is not that one? provided has toiled honestly, given to the best of his power, and till he has nore left to give? And his fame lasts how long? It is permissible eveor a dying hero to think before he dies how men will speak of hiereafter. His fame lasts perhaps two thousand years. And what are twhousand years? (asked Mr. Ramsay ironically, staring at the hedge)hat, indeed, if you look from a mountain top down the long wastes of thges? The very stone one kicks with one's boot will outlast Shakespeareis own little light would shine, not very brightly, for a year or twond would then be merged in some bigger light, and that in a bigger stillHe looked into the hedge, into the intricacy of the twigs.) Who theould blame the leader of that forlorn party which after all has climbeigh enough to see the waste of the years and the perishing of the starsf before death stiffens his limbs beyond the power of movement he does ittle consciously raise his numbed fingers to his brow, and square hihoulders, so that when the search party comes they will find him dead ais post, the fine figure of a soldier? Mr. Ramsay squared his shouldernd stood very upright by the urn.
Who shall blame him, if, so standing for a moment he dwells upon famepon search parties, upon cairns raised by grateful followers over hiones? Finally, who shall blame the leader of the doomed expedition, ifaving adventured to the uttermost, and used his strength wholly to thast ounce and fallen asleep not much caring if he wakes or not, he noerceives by some pricking in his toes that he lives, and does not on thhole object to live, but requires sympathy, and whisky, and some one tell the story of his suffering to at once? Who shall blame him? Whill not secretly rejoice when the hero puts his armour off, and halts bhe window and gazes at his wife and son, who, very distant at firstradually come closer and closer, till lips and book and head are clearlefore him, though still lovely and unfamiliar from the intensity of hisolation and the waste of ages and the perishing of the stars, aninally putting his pipe in his pocket and bending his magnificent heaefore her--who will blame him if he does homage to the beauty of thorld?
7
But his son hated him. He hated him for coming up to them, for stoppinnd looking down on them; he hated him for interrupting them; he hated hior the exaltation and sublimity of his gestures; for the magnificence ois head; for his exactingness and egotism (for there he stood, commandinhem to attend to him) but most of all he hated the twang and twitter ois father's emotion which, vibrating round them, disturbed the perfecimplicity and good sense of his relations with his mother. By lookinixedly at the page, he hoped to make him move on; by pointing his finget a word, he hoped to recall his mother's attention, which, he knengrily, wavered instantly his father stopped. But, no. Nothing woulake Mr. Ramsay move on. There he stood, demanding sympathy.
Mrs. Ramsay, who had been sitting loosely, folding her son in her armraced herself, and, half turning, seemed to raise herself with an effortnd at once to pour erect into the air a rain of energy, a column opray, looking at the same time animated and alive as if all her energieere being fused into force, burning and illuminating (quietly though shat, taking up her stocking again), and into this delicious fecundityhis fountain and spray of life, the fatal sterility of the male plungetself, like a beak of brass, barren and bare. He wanted sympathy. Has a failure, he said. Mrs. Ramsay flashed her needles. Mr. Ramsaepeated, never taking his eyes from her face, that he was a failurehe blew the words back at him. "Charles Tansley..." she said. But hust have more than that. It was sympathy he wanted, to be assured of hienius, first of all, and then to be taken within the circle of lifearmed and soothed, to have his senses restored to him, his barrennesade furtile, and all the rooms of the house made full of life--thrawing-room; behind the drawing-room the kitchen; above the kitchen thedrooms; and beyond them the nurseries; they must be furnished, they muse filled with life.
Charles Tansley thought him the greatest metaphysician of the time, shaid. But he must have more than that. He must have sympathy. He muse assured that he too lived in the heart of life; was needed; not onlere, but all over the world. Flashing her needles, confident, uprighthe created drawing-room and kitchen, set them all aglow; bade him takis ease there, go in and out, enjoy himself. She laughed, she knittedtanding between her knees, very stiff, James felt all her strengtlaring up to be drunk and quenched by the beak of brass, the aricimitar of the male, which smote mercilessly, again and againemanding sympathy.
He was a failure, he repeated. Well, look then, feel then. Flashing heeedles, glancing round about her, out of the window, into the room, aames himself, she assured him, beyond a shadow of a doubt, by her laugher poise, her competence (as a nurse carrying a light across a dark roossures a fractious child), that it was real; the house was full; tharden blowing. If he put implicit faith in her, nothing should hurt himowever deep he buried himself or climed high, not for a second should hind himself without her. So boasting of her capacity to surround anrotect, there was scarcely a shell of herself left for her to knoerself by; all was so lavished and spent; and James, as he stood stifetween her knees, felt her rise in a rosy-flowered fruit tree laid witeaves and dancing boughs into which the beak of brass, the arid scimitaf his father, the egotistical man, plunged and smote, demanding sympathy.
Filled with her words, like a child who drops off satisfied, he said, aast, looking at her with humble gratitude, restored, renewed, that hould take a turn; he would watch the children playing cricket. He went.
Immediately, Mrs. Ramsey seemed to fold herself together, one petal closen another, and the whole fabric fell in exhaustion upon itself, so thahe had only strength enough to move her finger, in exquisite abandonmeno exhaustion, across the page of Grimm's fairy story, while therhrobbed through her, like a pulse in a spring which has expanded to itull width and now gently ceases to beat, the rapture of successfureation.
Every throb of this pulse seemed, as he walked away, to enclose her aner husband, and to give to each that solace which two different notesne high, one low, struck together, seem to give each other as theombine. Yet as the resonance died, and she turned to the Fairy Talgain, Mrs. Ramsey felt not only exhausted in body (afterwards, not at thime, she always felt this) but also there tinged her physical fatiguome faintly disagreeable sensation with another origin. Not that, ahe read aloud the story of the Fisherman's Wife, she knew precisely what came from; nor did she let herself put into words her dissatisfactiohen she realized, at the turn of the page when she stopped and hearully, ominously, a wave fall, how it came from this: she did not likeven for a second, to feel finer than her husband; and further, could noear not being entirely sure, when she spoke to him, of the truth of whahe said. Universities and people wanting him, lectures and books anheir being of the highest importance--all that she did not doubt for oment; but it was their relation, and his coming to her like thatpenly, so that any one could see, that discomposed her; for then peoplaid he depended on her, when they must know that of the two he wanfinitely the more important, and what she gave the world, in comparisoith what he gave, negligable. But then again, it was the other thinoo--not being able to tell him the truth, being afraid, for instancebout the greenhouse roof and the expense it would be, fifty pounderhaps to mend it; and then about his books, to be afraid that he mighuess, what she a little suspected, that his last book was not quite hiest book (she gathered that from William Bankes); and then to hide smalaily things, and the children seeing it, and the burden it laid ohem--all this diminished the entire joy, the pure joy, of the two noteounding together, and let the sound die on her ear now with a dismalatness.
A shadow was on the page; she looked up. It was Augustus Carmichaehuffling past, precisely now, at the very moment when it was painful te reminded of the inadequacy of human relationships, that the moserfect was flawed, and could not bear the examination which, loving heusband, with her instinct for truth, she turned upon it; when it waainful to feel herself convicted of unworthiness, and impeded in heroper function by these lies, these exaggerations,--it was at thioment when she was fretted thus ignobly in the wake of her exaltationhat Mr. Carmichael shuffled past, in his yellow slippers, and some demon her made it necessary for her to call out, as he passed,
"Going indoors Mr. Carmichael?"
8
He said nothing. He took opium. The children said he had stained hieard yellow with it. Perhaps. What was obvious to her was that the pooan was unhappy, came to them every year as an escape; and yet every yeahe felt the same thing; he did not trust her. She said, "I am going the town. Shall I get you stamps, paper, tobacco?" and she felt hiince. He did not trust her. It was his wife's doing. She rememberehat iniquity of his wife's towards him, which had made her turn to steend adamant there, in the horrible little room in St John's Wood, wheith her own eyes she had seen that odious woman turn him out of thouse. He was unkempt; he dropped things on his coat; he had thiresomeness of an old man with nothing in the world to do; and she turneim out of the room. She said, in her odious way, "Now, Mrs. Ramsay and ant to have a little talk together," and Mrs. Ramsay could see, as iefore her eyes, the innumerable miseries of his life. Had he monenough to buy tobacco? Did he have to ask her for it? half a crownighteenpence? Oh, she could not bear to think of the little indignitiehe made him suffer. And always now (why, she could not guess, excephat it came probably from that woman somehow) he shrank from her. Hever told her anything. But what more could she have done? There was unny room given up to him. The children were good to him. Never did shhow a sign of not wanting him. She went out of her way indeed to briendly. Do you want stamps, do you want tobacco? Here's a book yoight like and so on. And after all--after all (here insensibly she dreerself together, physically, the sense of her own beauty becoming, as iid so seldom, present to her) after all, she had not generally anifficulty in making people like her; for instance, George Manning; Mrallace; famous as they were, they would come to her of an eveninguietly, and talk alone over her fire. She bore about with her, she coulot help knowing it, the torch of her beauty; she carried it erect intny room that she entered; and after all, veil it as she might, and shrinrom the monotony of bearing that it imposed on her, her beauty wapparent. She had been admired. She had been loved. She had entereooms where mourners sat. Tears had flown in her presence. Men, anomen too, letting go to the multiplicity of things, had allowehemselves with her the relief of simplicity. It injured her that hhould shrink. It hurt her. And yet not cleanly, not rightly. That wahat she minded, coming as it did on top of her discontent with heusband; the sense she had now when Mr. Carmichael shuffled past, jusodding to her question, with a book beneath his arm, in his yellolippers, that she was suspected; and that all this desire of hers tive, to help, was vanity. For her own self-satisfaction was it that shished so instinctively to help, to give, that people might say of herO Mrs. Ramsay! dear Mrs. Ramsay ... Mrs. Ramsay, of course!" and need hend send for her and admire her? Was it not secretly this that shanted, and therefore when Mr. Carmichael shrank away from her, as he dit this moment, making off to some corner where he did acrosticndlessly, she did not feel merely snubbed back in her instinct, but madware of the pettiness of some part of her, and of human relations, holawed they are, how despicable, how self-seeking, at their best. Shabbnd worn out, and not presumably (her cheeks were hollow, her hair wahite) any longer a sight that filled the eyes with joy, she had betteevote her mind to the story of the Fisherman and his Wife and so pacifhat bundle of sensitiveness (none of her children was as sensitive as has), her son James.
"The man's heart grew heavy," she read aloud, "and he would not go. Haid to himself, 'It is not right,' and yet he went. And when he came the sea the water was quite purple and dark blue, and grey and thick, ano longer so green and yellow, but it was still quiet. And he stood thernd said--"
Mrs. Ramsay could have wished that her husband had not chosen that momeno stop. Why had he not gone as he said to watch the children playinricket? But he did not speak; he looked; he nodded; he approved; he wenn. He slipped, seeing before him that hedge which had over and ovegain rounded some pause, signified some conclusion, seeing his wife anhild, seeing again the urns with the trailing of red geraniums which hao often decorated processes of thought, and bore, written up among theieaves, as if they were scraps of paper on which one scribbles notes ihe rush of reading--he slipped, seeing all this, smoothly intpeculation suggested by an article in THE TIMES about the number omericans who visit Shakespeare's house every year. If Shakespearad never existed, he asked, would the world have differed much from what is today? Does the progress of civilization depend upon great men? Ihe lot of the average human being better now than in the time of thharaohs? Is the lot of the average human being, however, he askeimself, the criterion by which we judge the measure of civilizationossibly not. Possibly the greatest good requires the existence of lave class. The liftman in the Tube is an eternal necessity. Thhought was distasteful to him. He tossed his head. To avoid it, hould find some way of snubbing the predominance of the arts. He woulrgue that the world exists for the average human being; that the arts arerely a decoration imposed on the top of human life; they do not exprest. Nor is Shakespeare necessary to it. Not knowing precisely why it wahat he wanted to disparage Shakespeare and come to the rescue of the maho stands eternally in the door of the lift, he picked a leaf sharplrom the hedge. All this would have to be dished up for the young men aardiff next month, he thought; here, on his terrace, he was mereloraging and picnicking (he threw away the leaf that he had picked seevishly) like a man who reaches from his horse to pick a bunch of rosesr stuffs his pockets with nuts as he ambles at his ease through the lanend fields of a country known to him from boyhood. It was all familiarhis turning, that stile, that cut across the fields. Hours he woulpend thus, with his pipe, of an evening, thinking up and down and in anut of the old familiar lanes and commons, which were all stuck about withe history of that campaign there, the life of this statesman here, witoems and with anecdotes, with figures too, this thinker, that soldierll very brisk and clear; but at length the lane, the field, the commonhe fruitful nut-tree and the flowering hedge led him on to that furtheurn of the road where he dismounted always, tied his horse to a treend proceeded on foot alone. He reached the edge of the lawn and lookeut on the bay beneath.
It was his fate, his peculiarity, whether he wished it or not, to come ouhus on a spit of land which the sea is slowly eating away, and there ttand, like a desolate sea-bird, alone. It was his power, his giftuddenly to shed all superfluities, to shrink and diminish so that hooked barer and felt sparer, even physically, yet lost none of hintensity of mind, and so to stand on his little ledge facing the dark ouman ignorance, how we know nothing and the sea eats away the ground wtand on--that was his fate, his gift. But having thrown away, when hismounted, all gestures and fripperies, all trophies of nuts and rosesnd shrunk so that not only fame but even his own name was forgottey him, kept even in that desolation a vigilance which spared nhantom and luxuriated in no vision, and it was in this guise thae inspired in William Bankes (intermittently) and in Charles Tansleobsequiously)and in his wife now, when she looked up and saw hitanding at the edge of the lawn, profoundly, reverence, and pity, anratitude too, as a stake driven into the bed of a channel upon which thulls perch and the waves beat inspires in merry boat-loads a feeling oratitude for the duty it is taking upon itself of marking the channel ouhere in the floods alone.
"But the father of eight children has no choice." Muttering half aloudo he broke off, turned, sighed, raised his eyes, sought the figure of hiife reading stories to his little boy, filled his pipe. He turned frohe sight of human ignorance and human fate and the sea eating the groune stand on, which, had he been able to contemplate it fixedly might haved to something; and found consolation in trifles so slight compared withe august theme just now before him that he was disposed to slur thaomfort over, to deprecate it, as if to be caught happy in a world oisery was for an honest man the most despicable of crimes. It was truee was for the most part happy; he had his wife; he had his children; had promised in six weeks' time to talk "some nonsense" to the young mef Cardiff about Locke, Hume, Berkeley, and the causes of the Frencevolution. But this and his pleasure in it, his glory in the phrases hade, in the ardour of youth, in his wife's beauty, in the tributes thaeached him from Swansea, Cardiff, Exeter, Southampton, Kidderminsterxford, Cambridge--all had to be deprecated and concealed under the phrastalking nonsense," because, in effect, he had not done the thing he mighave done. It was a disguise; it was the refuge of a man afraid to owis own feelings, who could not say, This is what I like--this is what m; and rather pitiable and distasteful to William Bankes and Lily Briscoeho wondered why such concealments should be necessary; why he needelways praise; why so brave a man in thought should be so timid in lifeow strangely he was venerable and laughable at one and the same time.
Teaching and preaching is beyond human power, Lily suspected. (She wautting away her things.) If you are exalted you must somehow come ropper. Mrs. Ramsay gave him what he asked too easily. Then the changust be so upsetting, Lily said. He comes in from his books and finds ull playing games and talking nonsense. Imagine what a change from thhings he thinks about, she said.
He was bearing down upon them. Now he stopped dead and stood looking iilence at the sea. Now he had turned away again.
9
Yes, Mr. Bankes said, watching him go. It was a thousand pities. (Lilad said something about his frightening her--he changed from one mood tnother so suddenly.) Yes, said Mr. Bankes, it was a thousand pities thaamsay could not behave a little more like other people. (For he likeily Briscoe; he could discuss Ramsay with her quite openly.) It was fohat reason, he said, that the young don't read Carlyle. A crusty olrumbler who lost his temper if the porridge was cold, why should hreach to us? was what Mr. Bankes understood that young people saiowadays. It was a thousand pities if you thought, as he did, thaarlyle was one of the great teachers of mankind. Lily was ashamed to sahat she had not read Carlyle since she was at school. But in her opinione liked Mr. Ramsay all the better for thinking that if his little fingeched the whole world must come to an end. It was not THAT she mindedor who could be deceived by him? He asked you quite openly to flatteim, to admire him, his little dodges deceived nobody. What she dislikeas his narrowness, his blindness, she said, looking after him.
"A bit of a hypocrite?" Mr. Bankes suggested, looking too at Mr. Ramsay'ack, for was he not thinking of his friendship, and of Cam refusing tive him a flower, and of all those boys and girls, and his own houseull of comfort, but, since his wife's death, quiet rather? Of coursee had his work... All the same, he rather wished Lily to agree thaamsay was, as he said, "a bit of a hypocrite."
Lily Briscoe went on putting away her brushes, looking up, looking downooking up, there he was--Mr. Ramsay--advancing towards them, swingingareless, oblivious, remote. A bit of a hypocrite? she repeated. Oho--the most sincere of men, the truest (here he was), the best; butooking down, she thought, he is absorbed in himself, he is tyrannicale is unjust; and kept looking down, purposely, for only so could she keeteady, staying with the Ramsays. Directly one looked up and saw themhat she called "being in love" flooded them. They became part of thanreal but penetrating and exciting universe which is the world seehrough the eyes of love. The sky stuck to them; the birds sang throughem. And, what was even more exciting, she felt, too, as she saw Mramsay bearing down and retreating, and Mrs. Ramsay sitting with James ihe window and the cloud moving and the tree bending, how life, from beinade up of little separate incidents which one lived one by one, becamurled and whole like a wave which bore one up and threw one down witt, there, with a dash on the beach.
Mr. Bankes expected her to answer. And she was about to say somethinriticizing Mrs. Ramsay, how she was alarming, too, in her wayigh-handed, or words to that effect, when Mr. Bankes made it entirelnnecessary for her to speak by his rapture. For such it was considerinis age, turned sixty, and his cleanliness and his impersonality, and thhite scientific coat which seemed to clothe him. For him to gaze as Lilaw him gazing at Mrs. Ramsay was a rapture, equivalent, Lily felt, to thoves of dozens of young men (and perhaps Mrs. Ramsay had never excited thoves of dozens of young men). It was love, she thought, pretending tove her canvas, distilled and filtered; love that never attempted tlutch its object; but, like the love which mathematicians bear theiymbols, or poets their phrases, was meant to be spread over the world anecome part of the human gain. So it was indeed. The world by all meanhould have shared it, could Mr. Bankes have said why that woman pleaseim so; why the sight of her reading a fairy tale to her boy had upon hirecisely the same effect as the solution of a scientific problem, so thae rested in contemplation of it, and felt, as he felt when he had proveomething absolute about the digestive system of plants, that barbaritas tamed, the reign of chaos subdued.
Such a rapture--for by what other name could one call it?--made Lilriscoe forget entirely what she had been about to say. It was nothing omportance; something about Mrs. Ramsay. It paled beside this "rapture,his silent stare, for which she felt intense gratitude; for nothing solaced her, eased her of the perplexity of life, and miraculously raisets burdens, as this sublime power, this heavenly gift, and one would nore disturb it, while it lasted, than break up the shaft of sunlightying level across the floor.
That people should love like this, that Mr. Bankes should feel this fors. Ramsey (she glanced at him musing) was helpful, was exalting. Shiped one brush after another upon a piece of old rag, menially, ourpose. She took shelter from the reverence which covered all women; shelt herself praised. Let him gaze; she would steal a look at heicture.
She could have wept. It was bad, it was bad, it was infinitely bad! Should have done it differently of course; the colour could have beehinned and faded; the shapes etherealised; that was how Paunceforte woulave seen it. But then she did not see it like that. She saw the colouurning on a framework of steel; the light of a butterfly's wing lyinpon the arches of a cathedral. Of all that only a few random markcrawled upon the canvas remained. And it would never be seen; never bung even, and there was Mr. Tansley whispering in her ear, "Women can'aint, women can't write ..."
She now remembered what she had been going to say about Mrs. Ramsay. Shid not know how she would have put it; but it would have been somethinritical. She had been annoyed the other night by some highhandednessooking along the level of Mr. Bankes's glance at her, she thought that noman could worship another woman in the way he worshipped; they coulnly seek shelter under the shade which Mr. Bankes extended over them bothooking along his beam she added to it her different ray, thinking thahe was unquestionably the loveliest of people (bowed over her book); thest perhaps; but also, different too from the perfect shape which one sahere. But why different, and how different? she asked herself, scrapiner palette of all those mounds of blue and green which seemed to her liklods with no life in them now, yet she vowed, she would inspire themorce them to move, flow, do her bidding tomorrow. How did she differhat was the spirit in her, the essential thing, by which, had you found rumpled glove in the corner of a sofa, you would have known it, from itwisted finger, hers indisputably? She was like a bird for speed, arrow for directness. She was willful; she was commanding (of courseily reminded herself, I am thinking of her relations with women, and I auch younger, an insignificant person, living off the Brompton Road). Shpened bedroom windows. She shut doors. (So she tried to start the tunf Mrs. Ramsay in her head.) Arriving late at night, with a light tap one's bedroom door, wrapped in an old fur coat (for the setting of heeauty was always that--hasty, but apt), she would enact again whatever iight be--Charles Tansley losing his umbrella; Mr. Carmichael snuffling anniffing; Mr. Bankes saying, "The vegetable salts are lost." All this should adroitly shape; even maliciously twist; and, moving over to thindow, in pretence that she must go,--it was dawn, she could see the suising,--half turn back, more intimately, but still always laughingnsist that she must, Minta must, they all must marry, since in the wholorld whatever laurels might be tossed to her (but Mrs. Ramsay cared not ig for her painting), or triumphs won by her (probably Mrs. Ramsay haad her share of those), and here she saddened, darkened, and came back ter chair, there could be no disputing this: an unmarried woman (shightly took her hand for a moment), an unmarried woman has missed thest of life. The house seemed full of children sleeping and Mrs. Ramsaistening; shaded lights and regular breathing.
Oh, but, Lily would say, there was her father; her home; even, had shared to say it, her painting. But all this seemed so little, sirginal, against the other. Yet, as the night wore on, and white lightarted the curtains, and even now and then some bird chirped in tharden, gathering a desperate courage she would urge her own exemptiorom the universal law; plead for it; she liked to be alone; she liked te herself; she was not made for that; and so have to meet a serious starrom eyes of unparalleled depth, and confront Mrs. Ramsay's simplertainty (and she was childlike now) that her dear Lily, her littlrisk, was a fool. Then, she remembered, she had laid her head on Mrsamsay's lap and laughed and laughed and laughed, laughed almosysterically at the thought of Mrs. Ramsay presiding with immutable calver destinies which she completely failed to understand. There she satimple, serious. She had recovered her sense of her now--this was thlove's twisted finger. But into what sanctuary had one penetratedily Briscoe had looked up at last, and there was Mrs. Ramsay, unwittinntirely what had caused her laughter, still presiding, but now with everrace of wilfulness abolished, and in its stead, something clear as thpace which the clouds at last uncover--the little space of sky whicleeps beside the moon.
Was it wisdom? Was it knowledge? Was it, once more, the deceptiveness oeauty, so that all one's perceptions, half way to truth, were tangled i golden mesh? or did she lock up within her some secret which certainlily Briscoe believed people must have for the world to go on at allvery one could not be as helter skelter, hand to mouth as she was. Buf they knew, could they tell one what they knew? Sitting on the flooith her arms round Mrs. Ramsay's knees, close as she could get, smilino think that Mrs. Ramsay would never know the reason of that pressure, shmagined how in the chambers of the mind and heart of the woman who washysically, touching her, were stood, like the treasures in the tombs oings, tablets bearing sacred inscriptions, which if one could spell theut, would teach one everything, but they would never be offered openlyever made public. What art was there, known to love or cunning, by whicne pressed through into those secret chambers? What device for becomingike waters poured into one jar, inextricably the same, one with thbject one adored? Could the body achieve, or the mind, subtly minglinn the intricate passages of the brain? or the heart? Could lovings people called it, make her and Mrs. Ramsay one? for it was not knowledgut unity that she desired, not inscriptions on tablets, nothing thaould be written in any language known to men, but intimacy itself, whics knowledge, she had thought, leaning her head on Mrs. Ramsay's knee.
Nothing happened. Nothing! Nothing! as she leant her head againsrs. Ramsay's knee. And yet, she knew knowledge and wisdom were stored un Mrs. Ramsay's heart. How, then, she had asked herself, did one know onhing or another thing about people, sealed as they were? Only like ee, drawn by some sweetness or sharpness in the air intangible to toucr taste, one haunted the dome-shaped hive, ranged the wastes of the aiver the countries of the world alone, and then haunted the hives witheir murmurs and their stirrings; the hives, which were peoplers. Ramsay rose. Lily rose. Mrs. Ramsay went. For days there hung abouer, as after a dream some subtle change is felt in the person one hareamt of, more vividly than anything she said, the sound of murmurinnd, as she sat in the wicker arm-chair in the drawing-room window shore, to Lily's eyes, an august shape; the shape of a dome.
This ray passed level with Mr. Bankes's ray straight to Mrs. Ramsay sittineading there with James at her knee. But now while she still lookedr. Bankes had done. He had put on his spectacles. He had stepped backe had raised his hand. He had slightly narrowed his clear blue eyeshen Lily, rousing herself, saw what he was at, and winced like a dog whees a hand raised to strike it. She would have snatched her picture ofhe easel, but she said to herself, One must. She braced herself to stanhe awful trial of some one looking at her picture. One must, she saidne must. And if it must be seen, Mr. Bankes was less alarming thanother. But that any other eyes should see the residue of hehirty-three years, the deposit of each day's living mixed with somethinore secret than she had ever spoken or shown in the course of all thosays was an agony. At the same time it was immensely exciting.
Nothing could be cooler and quieter. Taking out a pen-knife, Mr. Bankeapped the canvas with the bone handle. What did she wish to indicate bhe triangular purple shape, "just there"? he asked.
It was Mrs. Ramsay reading to James, she said. She knew his objection-hat no one could tell it for a human shape. But she had made no attempt likeness, she said. For what reason had she introduced them then? hsked. Why indeed?--except that if there, in that corner, it was brightere, in this, she felt the need of darkness. Simple, obviousommonplace, as it was, Mr. Bankes was interested. Mother and chilhen--objects of universal veneration, and in this case the mother waamous for her beauty--might be reduced, he pondered, to a purple shadoithout irreverence.
But the picture was not of them, she said. Or, not in his sense. Therere other senses too in which one might reverence them. By a shadow hernd a light there, for instance. Her tribute took that form if, as shaguely supposed, a picture must be a tribute. A mother and child mighe reduced to a shadow without irreverence. A light here required hadow there. He considered. He was interested. He took icientifically in complete good faith. The truth was that all hirejudices were on the other side, he explained. The largest picture iis drawing-room, which painters had praised, and valued at a higher prichan he had given for it, was of the cherry trees in blossom on the bankf the Kennet. He had spent his honeymoon on the banks of the Kennet, haid. Lily must come and see that picture, he said. But now--he turnedith his glasses raised to the scientific examination of her canvas. Thuestion being one of the relations of masses, of lights and shadowshich, to be honest, he had never considered before, he would like to havt explained--what then did she wish to make of it? And he indicated thcene before them. She looked. She could not show him what she wished take of it, could not see it even herself, without a brush in her handhe took up once more her old painting position with the dim eyes and thbsent-minded manner, subduing all her impressions as a woman to somethinuch more general; becoming once more under the power of that vision whiche had seen clearly once and must now grope for among hedges and housend mothers and children--her picture. It was a question, she rememberedow to connect this mass on the right hand with that on the left. Shight do it by bringing the line of the branch across so; or break thacancy in the foreground by an object (James perhaps) so. But the dangeas that by doing that the unity of the whole might be broken. Shtopped; she did not want to bore him; she took the canvas lightly off thasel.
But it had been seen; it had been taken from her. This man had shareith her something profoundly intimate. And, thanking Mr. Ramsay for ind Mrs. Ramsay for it and the hour and the place, crediting the world wit power which she had not suspected--that one could walk away down thaong gallery not alone any more but arm in arm with somebody--thtrangest feeling in the world, and the most exhilarating--she nickehe catch of her paint-box to, more firmly than was necessary, and thick seemed to surround in a circle forever the paint-box, the lawnr. Bankes, and that wild villain, Cam, dashing past.
10
For Cam grazed the easel by an inch; she would not stop for Mr. Bankend Lily Briscoe; though Mr. Bankes, who would have liked a daughter ois own, held out his hand; she would not stop for her father, whom shrazed also by an inch; nor for her mother, who called "Cam! I wanou a moment!" as she dashed past. She was off like a bird, bullet, orrow, impelled by what desire, shot by whom, at what directed, whould say? What, what? Mrs. Ramsay pondered, watching her. It mighe a vision--of a shell, of a wheelbarrow, of a fairy kingdom on thar side of the hedge; or it might be the glory of speed; no one knewut when Mrs. Ramsay called "Cam!" a second time, the projectile droppen mid career, and Cam came lagging back, pulling a leaf by the way, ter mother.
What was she dreaming about, Mrs. Ramsay wondered, seeing her engrosseds she stood there, with some thought of her own, so that she had tepeat the message twice--ask Mildred if Andrew, Miss Doyle, and Mrayley have come back?--The words seemed to be dropped into a wellhere, if the waters were clear, they were also so extraordinarilistorting that, even as they descended, one saw them twisting about take Heaven knows what pattern on the floor of the child's mind. Whaessage would Cam give the cook? Mrs. Ramsay wondered. And indeed ias only by waiting patiently, and hearing that there was an old woman ihe kitchen with very red cheeks, drinking soup out of a basin, thars. Ramsay at last prompted that parrot-like instinct which had picked uildred's words quite accurately and could now produce them, if onaited, in a colourless singsong. Shifting from foot to foot, Caepeated the words, "No, they haven't, and I've told Ellen to clear awaea."
Minta Doyle and Paul Rayley had not come back then. That could onlean, Mrs. Ramsay thought, one thing. She must accept him, or she musefuse him. This going off after luncheon for a walk, even thougndrew was with them--what could it mean? except that she had decidedightly, Mrs. Ramsay thought (and she was very, very fond of Minta), tccept that good fellow, who might not be brilliant, but then, thoughrs. Ramsay, realising that James was tugging at her, to make her go oeading aloud the Fisherman and his Wife, she did in her own hearnfinitely prefer boobies to clever men who wrote dissertationsharles Tansley, for instance. Anyhow it must have happened, one war the other, by now.
But she read, "Next morning the wife awoke first, and it was jusaybreak, and from her bed she saw the beautiful country lying beforer. Her husband was still stretching himself..."
But how could Minta say now that she would not have him? Not if shgreed to spend whole afternoons trapesing about the country alone--fondrew would be off after his crabs--but possibly Nancy was with themhe tried to recall the sight of them standing at the hall door afteunch. There they stood, looking at the sky, wondering about theather, and she had said, thinking partly to cover their shynessartly to encourage them to be off (for her sympathies were with Paul),
"There isn't a cloud anywhere within miles," at which she could feeittle Charles Tansley, who had followed them out, snigger. But shid it on purpose. Whether Nancy was there or not, she could not bertain, looking from one to the other in her mind's eye.
She read on: "Ah, wife," said the man, "why should we be King? I dot want to be King." "Well," said the wife, "if you won't be King, ill; go to the Flounder, for I will be King."
"Come in or go out, Cam," she said, knowing that Cam was attracted only the word "Flounder" and that in a moment she would fidget and fighith James as usual. Cam shot off. Mrs. Ramsay went on readingelieved, for she and James shared the same tastes and were comfortablogether.
"And when he came to the sea, it was quite dark grey, and the water heavep from below, and smelt putrid. Then he went and stood by it and said,
'Flounder, flounder, in the seaome, I pray thee, here to meor my wife, good Ilsabilills not as I'd have her will.'
'Well, what does she want then?' said the Flounder." And where werhey now? Mrs. Ramsay wondered, reading and thinking, quite easilyoth at the same time; for the story of the Fisherman and his Wife waike the bass gently accompanying a tune, which now and then ran unexpectedly into the melody. And when should she be told? If nothinappened, she would have to speak seriously to Minta. For she coulot go trapesing about all over the country, even if Nancy were withem (she tried again, unsuccessfully, to visualize their backs goinown the path, and to count them). She was responsible to Minta'arents--the Owl and the Poker. Her nicknames for them shot into heind as she read. The Owl and the Poker--yes, they would be annoyed ihey heard--and they were certain to hear--that Minta, staying with thamsays, had been seen etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. "He wore a wig ihe House of Commons and she ably assisted him at the head of thtairs," she repeated, fishing them up out of her mind by a phrashich, coming back from some party, she had made to amuse her husbandear, dear, Mrs. Ramsay said to herself, how did they produce thincongruous daughter? this tomboy Minta, with a hole in her stockingow did she exist in that portentous atmosphere where the maid walways removing in a dust-pan the sand that the parrot had scatterednd conversation was almost entirely reduced to the exploits--interestinerhaps, but limited after all--of that bird? Naturally, one had askeer to lunch, tea, dinner, finally to stay with them up at Finlay, whicad resulted in some friction with the Owl, her mother, and more callingnd more conversation, and more sand, and really at the end of it, she haold enough lies about parrots to last her a lifetime (so she had saio her husband that night, coming back from the party). Howeverinta came...Yes, she came, Mrs. Ramsay thought, suspecting some thorn the tangle of this thought; and disengaging it found it to be this: oman had once accused her of "robbing her of her daughter's affections"omething Mrs. Doyle had said made her remember that charge again. Wishino dominate, wishing to interfere, making people do what she wished--thaas the charge against her, and she thought it most unjust. How coulhe help being "like that" to look at? No one could accuse her oaking pains to impress. She was often ashamed of her own shabbinessor was she domineering, nor was she tyrannical. It was more trubout hospitals and drains and the dairy. About things like that shid feel passionately, and would, if she had the chance, have liked take people by the scruff of their necks and make them see. Nospital on the whole island. It was a disgrace. Milk delivered aour door in London positively brown with dirt. It should be madllegal. A model dairy and a hospital up here--those two things should have liked to do, herself. But how? With all these childrenhen they were older, then perhaps she would have time; when they werll at school.
Oh, but she never wanted James to grow a day older! or Cam eitherhese two she would have liked to keep for ever just as they wereemons of wickedness, angels of delight, never to see them grow up intong-legged monsters. Nothing made up up for the loss. When she reaust now to James, "and there were numbers of soldiers with kettledrumnd trumpets," and his eyes darkened, she thought, why should they grop and lose all that? He was the most gifted, the most sensitive oer children. But all, she thought, were full of promise. Prue, erfect angel with the others, and sometimes now, at night especiallyhe took one's breath away with her beauty. Andrew--even her husbandmitted that his gift for mathematics was extraordinary. And Nancnd Roger, they were both wild creatures now, scampering about over thountry all day long. As for Rose, her mouth was too big, but she ha wonderful gift with her hands. If they had charades, Rose made thresses; made everything; liked best arranging tables, flowersnything. She did not like it that Jasper should shoot birds; but ias only a stage; they all went through stages. Why, she askedressing her chin on James's head, should they grow up so fast? Whhould they go to school? She would have liked always to have had aby. She was happiest carrying one in her arms. Then people mighay she was tyrannical, domineering, masterful, if they chose; she diot mind. And, touching his hair with her lips, she thought, he wilever be so happy again, but stopped herself, remembering how ingered her husband that she should say that. Still, it was true. Theere happier now than they would ever be again. A tenpenny tea seade Cam happy for days. She heard them stamping and crowing on thloor above her head the moment they awoke. They came bustling alonhe passage. Then the door sprang open and in they came, fresh aoses, staring, wide awake, as if this coming into the dining-roofter breakfast, which they did every day of their lives, was ositive event to them, and so on, with one thing after another, alay long, until she went up to say good-night to them, and found theetted in their cots like birds among cherries and raspberries, stilaking up stories about some little bit of rubbish--something they haeard, something they had picked up in the garden. They all had theiittle treasures... And so she went down and said to her husband, Whust they grow up and lose it all? Never will they be so happy againnd he was angry. Why take such a gloomy view of life? he said. Is not sensible. For it was odd; and she believed it to be true; thaith all his gloom and desperation he was happier, more hopeful on thhole, than she was. Less exposed to human worries--perhaps that wat. He had always his work to fall back on. Not that she herself wapessimistic," as he accused her of being. Only she thought life--an little strip of time presented itself to her eyes--her fiftears. There it was before her--life. Life, she thought--but she diot finish her thought. She took a look at life, for she had a cleaense of it there, something real, something private, which she shareeither with her children nor with her husband. A sort of transactioent on between them, in which she was on one side, and life was onother, and she was always trying to get the better of it, as it waf her; and sometimes they parleyed (when she sat alone); there werehe remembered, great reconciliation scenes; but for the most partddly enough, she must admit that she felt this thing that she calleife terrible, hostile, and quick to pounce on you if you gave it hance. There were eternal problems: suffering; death; the poor. Theras always a woman dying of cancer even here. And yet she had said tll these children, You shall go through it all. To eight people shad said relentlessly that (and the bill for the greenhouse would bifty pounds). For that reason, knowing what was before them--love anmbition and being wretched alone in dreary places--she had often theeling, Why must they grow up and lose it all? And then she said terself, brandishing her sword at life, Nonsense. They will berfectly happy. And here she was, she reflected, feeling life ratheinister again, making Minta marry Paul Rayley; because whatever shight feel about her own transaction, she had had experiences whiceed not happen to every one (she did not name them to herself); shas driven on, too quickly she knew, almost as if it were an escape foer too, to say that people must marry; people must have children.
Was she wrong in this, she asked herself, reviewing her conduct for thast week or two, and wondering if she had indeed put any pressure upointa, who was only twenty-four, to make up her mind. She was uneasyad she not laughed about it? Was she not forgetting again hotrongly she influenced people? Marriage needed--oh, all sorts oualities (the bill for the greenhouse would be fifty pounds); one--sheed not name it--that was essential; the thing she had with heusband. Had they that?
"Then he put on his trousers and ran away like a madman," she readBut outside a great storm was raging and blowing so hard that he coulcarcely keep his feet; houses and trees toppled over, the mountainrembled, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky was pitch black, and ihundered and lightened, and the sea came in with black waves as higs church towers and mountains, and all with white foam at the top."
She turned the page; there were only a few lines more, so that should finish the story, though it was past bed-time. It was gettinate. The light in the garden told her that; and the whitening of thlowers and something grey in the leaves conspired together, to rousn her a feeling of anxiety. What it was about she could not think airst. Then she remembered; Paul and Minta and Andrew had not comack. She summoned before her again the little group on the terrace iront of the hall door, standing looking up into the sky. Andrew hais net and basket. That meant he was going to catch crabs and thingshat meant he would climb out on to a rock; he would be cut off. Ooming back single file on one of those little paths above the clifne of them might slip. He would roll and then crash. It was growinuite dark.
But she did not let her voice change in the least as she finished thtory, and added, shutting the book, and speaking the last words as ihe had made them up herself, looking into James's eyes: "And therhey are living still at this very time."
"And that's the end," she said, and she saw in his eyes, as thnterest of the story died away in them, something else take its placeomething wondering, pale, like the reflection of a light, which ance made him gaze and marvel. Turning, she looked across the bay, anhere, sure enough, coming regularly across the waves first two quictrokes and then one long steady stroke, was the light of thighthouse. It had been lit.
In a moment he would ask her, "Are we going to the Lighthouse?" Anhe would have to say, "No: not tomorrow; your father says not.appily, Mildred came in to fetch them, and the bustle distracted themut he kept looking back over his shoulder as Mildred carried him outnd she was certain that he was thinking, we are not going to thighthouse tomorrow; and she thought, he will remember that all hiife.
11
No, she thought, putting together some of the pictures he had cut out- refrigerator, a mowing machine, a gentleman in evening dress-hildren never forget. For this reason, it was so important what onaid, and what one did, and it was a relief when they went to bed. Foow she need not think about anybody. She could be herself, berself. And that was what now she often felt the need of--to thinkell, not even to think. To be silent; to be alone. All the being anhe doing, expansive, glittering, vocal, evaporated; and one shrunkith a sense of solemnity, to being oneself, a wedge-shaped core oarkness, something invisible to others. Although she continued tnit, and sat upright, it was thus that she felt herself; and this selaving shed its attachments was free for the strangest adventures. Wheife sank down for a moment, the range of experience seemed limitlessnd to everybody there was always this sense of unlimited resourceshe supposed; one after another, she, Lily, Augustus Carmichael, museel, our apparitions, the things you know us by, are simply childisheneath it is all dark, it is all spreading, it is unfathomably deeput now and again we rise to the surface and that is what you see uy. Her horizon seemed to her limitless. There were all the placehe had not seen; the Indian plains; she felt herself pushing aside thhick leather curtain of a church in Rome. This core of darkness coulo anywhere, for no one saw it. They could not stop it, she thoughtxulting. There was freedom, there was peace, there was, moselcome of all, a summoning together, a resting on a platforf stability. Not as oneself did one find rest ever, in her experiencshe accomplished here something dexterous with her needles) but as edge of darkness. Losing personality, one lost the fret, the hurryhe stir; and there rose to her lips always some exclamation of triumpver life when things came together in this peace, this rest, thiternity; and pausing there she looked out to meet that stroke of thighthouse, the long steady stroke, the last of the three, which waer stroke, for watching them in this mood always at this hour onould not help attaching oneself to one thing especially of the thingne saw; and this thing, the long steady stroke, was her stroke. Oftehe found herself sitting and looking, sitting and looking, with heork in her hands until she became the thing she looked at--that lightor example. And it would lift up on it some little phrase or othehich had been lying in her mind like that--"Children don't forgethildren don't forget"--which she would repeat and begin adding to itt will end, it will end, she said. It will come, it will come, wheuddenly she added, We are in the hands of the Lord.
But instantly she was annoyed with herself for saying that. Who haaid it? Not she; she had been trapped into saying something she diot mean. She looked up over her knitting and met the third stroke ant seemed to her like her own eyes meeting her own eyes, searching ahe alone could search into her mind and her heart, purifying out oxistence that lie, any lie. She praised herself in praising thight, without vanity, for she was stern, she was searching, she waeautiful like that light. It was odd, she thought, how if one walone, one leant to inanimate things; trees, streams, flowers; felhey expressed one; felt they became one; felt they knew one, in ense were one; felt an irrational tenderness thus (she looked at thaong steady light) as for oneself. There rose, and she looked anooked with her needles suspended, there curled up off the floor of thind, rose from the lake of one's being, a mist, a bride to meet heover.
What brought her to say that: "We are in the hands of the Lord?" shondered. The insincerity slipping in among the truths roused hernnoyed her. She returned to her knitting again. How could any Lorave made this world? she asked. With her mind she had always seizehe fact that there is no reason, order, justice: but suffering, deathhe poor. There was no treachery too base for the world to commit; shnew that. No happiness lasted; she knew that. She knitted with firomposure, slightly pursing her lips and, without being aware of it, stiffened and composed the lines of her face in a habit of sternneshat when her husband passed, though he was chuckling at the thoughhat Hume, the philosopher, grown enormously fat, had stuck in a boge could not help noting, as he passed, the sternness at the heart oer beauty. It saddened him, and her remoteness pained him, and helt, as he passed, that he could not protect her, and, when he reachehe hedge, he was sad. He could do nothing to help her. He must stany and watch her. Indeed, the infernal truth was, he made things worsor her. He was irritable--he was touchy. He had lost his temper ovehe Lighthouse. He looked into the hedge, into its intricacy, itarkness.
Always, Mrs. Ramsay felt, one helped oneself out of solitude reluctantly laying hold of some little odd or end, some sound, some sight. Shistened, but it was all very still; cricket was over; the childreere in their baths; there was only the sound of the sea. She stoppenitting; she held the long reddish-brown stocking dangling in heands a moment. She saw the light again. With some irony in henterrogation, for when one woke at all, one's relations changed, shooked at the steady light, the pitiless, the remorseless, which was such her, yet so little her, which had her at its beck and call (shoke in the night and saw it bent across their bed, stroking thloor), but for all that she thought, watching it with fascinationypnotised, as if it were stroking with its silver fingers some sealeessel in her brain whose bursting would flood her with delight, shad known happiness, exquisite happiness, intense happiness, and iilvered the rough waves a little more brightly, as daylight faded, anhe blue went out of the sea and it rolled in waves of pure lemon whicurved and swelled and broke upon the beach and the ecstasy burst ier eyes and waves of pure delight raced over the floor of her mind anhe felt, It is enough! It is enough!
He turned and saw her. Ah! She was lovely, lovelier now than ever hhought. But he could not speak to her. He could not interrupt here wanted urgently to speak to her now that James was gone and she walone at last. But he resolved, no; he would not interrupt her. Shas aloof from him now in her beauty, in her sadness. He would let hee, and he passed her without a word, though it hurt him that shhould look so distant, and he could not reach her, he could do nothino help her. And again he would have passed her without a word had shot, at that very moment, given him of her own free will what she knee would never ask, and called to him and taken the green shawl off thicture frame, and gone to him. For he wished, she knew, to protecer.
12
She folded the green shawl about her shoulders. She took his arm. Hieauty was so great, she said, beginning to speak of Kennedy thardener, at once he was so awfully handsome, that she couldn't dismisim. There was a ladder against the greenhouse, and little lumps outty stuck about, for they were beginning to mend the greenhousees, but as she strolled along with her husband, she felt that thaarticular source of worry had been placed. She had it on the tip oer tongue to say, as they strolled, "It'll cost fifty pounds," bunstead, for her heart failed her about money, she talked about Jaspehooting birds, and he said, at once, soothing her instantly, that ias natural in a boy, and he trusted he would find better ways omusing himself before long. Her husband was so sensible, so justnd so she said, "Yes; all children go through stages," and begaonsidering the dahlias in the big bed, and wondering what about nexear's flowers, and had he heard the children's nickname for Charleansley, she asked. The atheist, they called him, the little atheistHe's not a polished specimen," said Mr. Ramsay. "Far from it," sairs. Ramsay.
She supposed it was all right leaving him to his own devices, Mrsamsay said, wondering whether it was any use sending down bulbs; dihey plant them? "Oh, he has his dissertation to write," said Mramsay. She knew all about THAT, said Mrs. Ramsay. He talked oothing else. It was about the influence of somebody upon somethingWell, it's all he has to count on," said Mr. Ramsay. "Pray Heaven hon't fall in love with Prue," said Mrs. Ramsay. He'd disinherit her ihe married him, said Mr. Ramsay. He did not look at the flowershich his wife was considering, but at a spot about a foot oo above them. There was no harm in him, he added, and was jusbout to say that anyhow he was the only young man in England whdmired his--when he choked it back. He would not bother her agaibout his books. These flowers seemed creditable, Mr. Ramsay saidowering his gaze and noticing something red, something brown. Yes, buhen these she had put in with her own hands, said Mrs. Ramsay. Thuestion was, what happened if she sent bulbs down; did Kennedy planhem? It was his incurable laziness; she added, moving on. If shtood over him all day long with a spade in her hand, he did sometimeo a stroke of work. So they strolled along, towards the red-hookers. "You're teaching your daughters to exaggerate," said Mramsay, reproving her. Her Aunt Camilla was far worse than she was, Mrsamsay remarked. "Nobody ever held up your Aunt Camilla as a model oirtue that I'm aware of," said Mr. Ramsay. "She was the most beautifuoman I ever saw," said Mrs. Ramsay. "Somebody else was that," said Mramsay. Prue was going to be far more beautiful than she was, said Mrsamsay. He saw no trace of it, said Mr. Ramsay. "Well, then, looonight," said Mrs. Ramsay. They paused. He wished Andrew could bnduced to work harder. He would lose every chance of a scholarship ie didn't. "Oh, scholarships!" she said. Mr. Ramsay thought her foolisor saying that, about a serious thing, like a scholarship. He shoule very proud of Andrew if he got a scholarship, he said. She would bust as proud of him if he didn't, she answered. They disagreed alwaybout this, but it did not matter. She liked him to believe icholarships, and he liked her to be proud of Andrew whatever he diduddenly she remembered those little paths on the edge of the cliffs.
Wasn't it late? she asked. They hadn't come home yet. He flicked hiatch carelessly open. But it was only just past seven. He held hiatch open for a moment, deciding that he would tell her what he haelt on the terrace. To begin with, it was not reasonable to be servous. Andrew could look after himself. Then, he wanted to tell hehat when he was walking on the terrace just now--here he becamncomfortable, as if he were breaking into that solitude, thaloofness, that remoteness of hers. But she pressed him. What hae wanted to tell her, she asked, thinking it was about going to thighthouse; that he was sorry he had said "Damn you." But no. He diot like to see her look so sad, he said. Only wool gathering, shrotested, flushing a little. They both felt uncomfortable, as if theid not know whether to go on or go back. She had been reading fairales to James, she said. No, they could not share that; they coulot say that.
They had reached the gap between the two clumps of red-hot pokers, anhere was the Lighthouse again, but she would not let herself look at. Had she known that he was looking at her, she thought, she woulot have let herself sit there, thinking. She disliked anything thaeminded her that she had been seen sitting thinking. So she lookever her shoulder, at the town. The lights were rippling and runnins if they were drops of silver water held firm in a wind. And all thoverty, all the suffering had turned to that, Mrs. Ramsay thought. Thights of the town and of the harbour and of the boats seemed like hantom net floating there to mark something which had sunk. Well, ie could not share her thoughts, Mr. Ramsay said to himself, he would bff, then, on his own. He wanted to go on thinking, telling himself thtory how Hume was stuck in a bog; he wanted to laugh. But first ias nonsense to be anxious about Andrew. When he was Andrew's age hsed to walk about the country all day long, with nothing but a biscuin his pocket and nobody bothered about him, or thought that he haallen over a cliff. He said aloud he thought he would be off for ay's walk if the weather held. He had had about enough of Bankes anf Carmichael. He would like a little solitude. Yes, she said. Innoyed him that she did not protest. She knew that he would never dt. He was too old now to walk all day long with a biscuit in hiocket. She worried about the boys, but not about him. Years agoefore he had married, he thought, looking across the bay, as thetood between the clumps of red-hot pokers, he had walked all day. Had made a meal off bread and cheese in a public house. He had workeen hours at a stretch; an old woman just popped her head in now angain and saw to the fire. That was the country he liked best, ovehere; those sandhills dwindling away into darkness. One could walll day without meeting a soul. There was not a house scarcely, not ingle village for miles on end. One could worry things out alonehere were little sandy beaches where no one had been since theginning of time. The seals sat up and looked at you. It sometimeeemed to him that in a little house out there, alone--he broke offighing. He had no right. The father of eight children--he remindeimself. And he would have been a beast and a cur to wish a singlhing altered. Andrew would be a better man than he had been. Pruould be a beauty, her mother said. They would stem the flood a bithat was a good bit of work on the whole--his eight children. Thehowed he did not damn the poor little universe entirely, for on avening like this, he thought, looking at the land dwindling away, thittle island seemed pathetically small, half swallowed up in the sea.
"Poor little place," he murmured with a sigh.
She heard him. He said the most melancholy things, but she noticehat directly he had said them he always seemed more cheerful thasual. All this phrase-making was a game, she thought, for if she haaid half what he said, she would have blown her brains out by now.
It annoyed her, this phrase-making, and she said to him, in a matterf-fact way, that it was a perfectly lovely evening. And what was hroaning about, she asked, half laughing, half complaining, for shuessed what he was thinking--he would have written better books if had not married.
He was not complaining, he said. She knew that he did not complainhe knew that he had nothing whatever to complain of. And he seizeer hand and raised it to his lips and kissed it with an intensity tharought the tears to her eyes, and quickly he dropped it.
They turned away from the view and began to walk up the path where thilver-green spear-like plants grew, arm in arm. His arm was almosike a young man's arm, Mrs. Ramsay thought, thin and hard, and shhought with delight how strong he still was, though he was over sixtynd how untamed and optimistic, and how strange it was that beinonvinced, as he was, of all sorts of horrors, seemed not to depresim, but to cheer him. Was it not odd, she reflected? Indeed heemed to her sometimes made differently from other people, born blindeaf, and dumb, to the ordinary things, but to the extraordinarhings, with an eye like an eagle's. His understanding oftestonished her. But did he notice the flowers? No. Did he notice thiew? No. Did he even notice his own daughter's beauty, or whethehere was pudding on his plate or roast beef? He would sit at tablith them like a person in a dream. And his habit of talking aloud, oaying poetry aloud, was growing on him, she was afraid; for sometimet was awkward--
Best and brightest come away!
poor Miss Giddings, when he shouted that at her, almost jumped out oer skin. But then, Mrs. Ramsay, though instantly taking his sidgainst all the silly Giddingses in the world, then, she thoughtntimating by a little pressure on his arm that he walked up hill toast for her, and she must stop for a moment to see whether those werresh molehills on the bank, then, she thought, stooping down to look great mind like his must be different in every way from ours. Alhe great men she had ever known, she thought, deciding that a rabbiust have got in, were like that, and it was good for young men (thoughe atmosphere of lecture-rooms was stuffy and depressing to her beyonndurance almost) simply to hear him, simply to look at him. Buithout shooting rabbits, how was one to keep them down? she wonderedt might be a rabbit; it might be a mole. Some creature anyhow wauining her Evening Primroses. And looking up, she saw above the thirees the first pulse of the full-throbbing star, and wanted to maker husband look at it; for the sight gave her such keen pleasure. Buhe stopped herself. He never looked at things. If he did, all hould say would be, Poor little world, with one of his sighs.
At that moment, he said, "Very fine," to please her, and pretended tdmire the flowers. But she knew quite well that he did not admirhem, or even realise that they were there. It was only to pleaser. Ah, but was that not Lily Briscoe strolling along with Williaankes? She focussed her short-sighted eyes upon the backs of etreating couple. Yes, indeed it was. Did that not mean that theould marry? Yes, it must! What an admirable idea! They must marry!
13
He had been to Amsterdam, Mr. Bankes was saying as he strolled acroshe lawn with Lily Briscoe. He had seen the Rembrandts. He had been tadrid. Unfortunately, it was Good Friday and the Prado was shut. Had been to Rome. Had Miss Briscoe never been to Rome? Oh, shhould--It would be a wonderful experience for her--the Sistinhapel; Michael Angelo; and Padua, with its Giottos. His wife had been bad health for many years, so that their sight-seeing had been on odest scale.
She had been to Brussels; she had been to Paris but only for a flyinisit to see an aunt who was ill. She had been to Dresden; there werasses of pictures she had not seen; however, Lily Briscoe reflectederhaps it was better not to see pictures: they only made onopelessly discontented with one's own work. Mr. Bankes thought onould carry that point of view too far. We can't all be Titians and wan't all be Darwins, he said; at the same time he doubted whether yoould have your Darwin and your Titian if it weren't for humble peoplike ourselves. Lily would have liked to pay him a compliment; you'rot humble, Mr. Bankes, she would have liked to have said. But he diot want compliments (most men do, she thought), and she was a littlshamed of her impulse and said nothing while he remarked that perhaphat he was saying did not apply to pictures. Anyhow, said Lilyossing off her little insincerity, she would always go on paintingecause it interested her. Yes, said Mr. Bankes, he was sure she wouldnd, as they reached the end of the lawn he was asking her whether shad difficulty in finding subjects in London when they turned and sahe Ramsays. So that is marriage, Lily thought, a man and a womaooking at a girl throwing a ball. That is what Mrs. Ramsay tried tell me the other night, she thought. For she was wearing a greehawl, and they were standing close together watching Prue anasper throwing catches. And suddenly the meaning which, for neason at all, as perhaps they are stepping out of the Tube oinging a doorbell, descends on people, making them symbolicalaking them representative, came upon them, and made them in the dustanding, looking, the symbols of marriage, husband and wife. Thenfter an instant, the symbolical outline which transcended the reaigures sank down again, and they became, as they met them, Mr. and Mrsamsay watching the children throwing catches. But still for a momenthough Mrs. Ramsay greeted them with her usual smile (oh, she's thinkine're going to get married, Lily thought) and said, "I have triumpheonight," meaning that for once Mr. Bankes had agreed to dine with thend not run off to his own lodging where his man cooked vegetableroperly; still, for one moment, there was a sense of things havineen blown apart, of space, of irresponsibility as the ball soareigh, and they followed it and lost it and saw the one star and thraped branches. In the failing light they all looked sharp-edged anthereal and divided by great distances. Then, darting backwards ovehe vast space (for it seemed as if solidity had vanished altogether)rue ran full tilt into them and caught the ball brilliantly high up ier left hand, and her mother said, "Haven't they come back yet?hereupon the spell was broken. Mr. Ramsay felt free now to laugh ououd at the thought that Hume had stuck in a bog and an old womaescued him on condition he said the Lord's Prayer, and chuckling timself he strolled off to his study. Mrs. Ramsay, bringing Prue bacnto throwing catches again, from which she had escaped, asked,
"Did Nancy go with them?"
14
(Certainly, Nancy had gone with them, since Minta Doyle had asked iith her dumb look, holding out her hand, as Nancy made off, afteunch, to her attic, to escape the horror of family life. Shupposed she must go then. She did not want to go. She did not want te drawn into it all. For as they walked along the road to the clifinta kept on taking her hand. Then she would let it go. Then should take it again. What was it she wanted? Nancy asked herselfhere was something, of course, that people wanted; for when Minta tooer hand and held it, Nancy, reluctantly, saw the whole world spreaut beneath her, as if it were Constantinople seen through a mist, anhen, however heavy-eyed one might be, one must needs ask, "Is thaanta Sofia?" "Is that the Golden Horn?" So Nancy asked, when Mintook her hand. "What is it that she wants? Is it that?" And what wahat? Here and there emerged from the mist (as Nancy looked down upoife spread beneath her) a pinnacle, a dome; prominent things, withouames. But when Minta dropped her hand, as she did when they ran dowhe hillside, all that, the dome, the pinnacle, whatever it was thaad protruded through the mist, sank down into it and disappearedinta, Andrew observed, was rather a good walker. She wore morensible clothes that most women. She wore very short skirts and blacnickerbockers. She would jump straight into a stream and floundecross. He liked her rashness, but he saw that it would not do--should kill herself in some idiotic way one of these days. She seemeo be afraid of nothing--except bulls. At the mere sight of a bull i field she would throw up her arms and fly screaming, which was thery thing to enrage a bull of course. But she did not mind owning uo it in the least; one must admit that. She knew she was an awfuoward about bulls, she said. She thought she must have been tossed ier perambulator when she was a baby. She didn't seem to mind what shaid or did. Suddenly now she pitched down on the edge of the clifnd began to sing some song about
Damn your eyes, damn your eyes.
They all had to join in and sing the chorus, and shout out together:
Damn your eyes, damn your eyes,
but it would be fatal to let the tide come in and cover up all the goounting-grounds before they got on to the beach.
"Fatal," Paul agreed, springing up, and as they went slithering downe kept quoting the guide-book about "these islands being justlelebrated for their park-like prospects and the extent and variety oheir marine curiosities." But it would not do altogether, thihouting and damning your eyes, Andrew felt, picking his way down thliff, this clapping him on the back, and calling him "old fellow" anll that; it would not altogether do. It was the worst of taking women walks. Once on the beach they separated, he going out on to thope's Nose, taking his shoes off, and rolling his socks in them anetting that couple look after themselves; Nancy waded out to her owocks and searched her own pools and let that couple look aftehemselves. She crouched low down and touched the smooth rubber-likea anemones, who were stuck like lumps of jelly to the side of thock. Brooding, she changed the pool into the sea, and made the minnownto sharks and whales, and cast vast clouds over this tiny world bolding her hand against the sun, and so brought darkness anesolation, like God himself, to millions of ignorant and innocenreatures, and then took her hand away suddenly and let the sun streaown. Out on the pale criss-crossed sand, high-stepping, fringedauntleted, stalked some fantastic leviathan (she was still enlarginhe pool), and slipped into the vast fissures of the mountain sidend then, letting her eyes slide imperceptibly above the pool and resn that wavering line of sea and sky, on the tree trunks which thmoke of steamers made waver on the horizon, she became with all thaower sweeping savagely in and inevitably withdrawing, hypnotised, anhe two senses of that vastness and this tininess (the pool haiminished again) flowering within it made her feel that she was bounand and foot and unable to move by the intensity of feelings whiceduced her own body, her own life, and the lives of all the people ihe world, for ever, to nothingness. So listening to the wavesrouching over the pool, she brooded.
And Andrew shouted that the sea was coming in, so she leapt splashinhrough the shallow waves on to the shore and ran up the beach and waarried by her own impetuosity and her desire for rapid movement righehind a rock and there--oh, heavens! in each other's arms, were Paund Minta kissing probably. She was outraged, indignant. She anndrew put on their shoes and stockings in dead silence without sayin thing about it. Indeed they were rather sharp with each other. Shight have called him when she saw the crayfish or whatever it wasndrew grumbled. However, they both felt, it's not our fault. Thead not wanted this horrid nuisance to happen. All the same irritated Andrew that Nancy should be a woman, and Nancy that Andrehould be a man, and they tied their shoes very neatly and drew thows rather tight.
It was not until they had climbed right up on to the top of the clifgain that Minta cried out that she had lost her grandmother's brooch-er grandmother's brooch, the sole ornament she possessed--a weepinillow, it was (they must remember it) set in pearls. They must haveen it, she said, with the tears running down her cheeks, throoch which her grandmother had fastened her cap with till thast day of her life. Now she had lost it. She would rather havost anything than that! She would go back and look for it. They alent back. They poked and peered and looked. They kept their headery low, and said things shortly and gruffly. Paul Rayley searcheike a madman all about the rock where they had been sitting. All thiother about a brooch really didn't do at all, Andrew thought, as Pauold him to make a "thorough search between this point and that." Thide was coming in fast. The sea would cover the place where they haat in a minute. There was not a ghost of a chance of their finding iow. "We shall be cut off!" Minta shrieked, suddenly terrified. As ihere were any danger of that! It was the same as the bulls all ovegain--she had no control over her emotions, Andrew thought. Womeadn't. The wretched Paul had to pacify her. The men (Andrew and Paut once became manly, and different from usual) took counsel brieflnd decided that they would plant Rayley's stick where they had sat anome back at low tide again. There was nothing more that could be donow. If the brooch was there, it would still be there in the morninghey assured her, but Minta still sobbed, all the way up to the top ohe cliff. It was her grandmother's brooch; she would rather have losnything but that, and yet Nancy felt, it might be true that she mindeosing her brooch, but she wasn't crying only for that. She was cryinor something else. We might all sit down and cry, she felt. But shid not know what for.
They drew ahead together, Paul and Minta, and he comforted her, anaid how famous he was for finding things. Once when he was a littloy he had found a gold watch. He would get up at daybreak and he waositive he would find it. It seemed to him that it would blmost dark, and he would be alone on the beach, and somehow it woule rather dangerous. He began telling her, however, that he woulertainly find it, and she said that she would not hear of his gettinp at dawn: it was lost: she knew that: she had had a presentiment whehe put it on that afternoon. And secretly he resolved that he woulot tell her, but he would slip out of the house at dawn when they werll asleep and if he could not find it he would go to Edinburgh and buer another, just like it but more beautiful. He would prove what hould do. And as they came out on the hill and saw the lights of thown beneath them, the lights coming out suddenly one by one seemeike things that were going to happen to him--his marriage, hihildren, his house; and again he thought, as they came out on to thigh road, which was shaded with high bushes, how they would retreanto solitude together, and walk on and on, he always leading her, anhe pressing close to his side (as she did now). As they turned by thross roads he thought what an appalling experience he had beehrough, and he must tell some one--Mrs. Ramsay of course, for it toois breath away to think what he had been and done. It had been fand away the worst moment of his life when he asked Minta to marry hime would go straight to Mrs. Ramsay, because he felt somehow that shas the person who had made him do it. She had made him think he coulo anything. Nobody else took him seriously. But she made him believhat he could do whatever he wanted. He had felt her eyes on him alay today, following him about (though she never said a word) as if shere saying, "Yes, you can do it. I believe in you. I expect it oou." She had made him feel all that, and directly they got back (hooked for the lights of the house above the bay) he would go to hend say, "I've done it, Mrs. Ramsay; thanks to you." And so turning inthe lane that led to the house he could see lights moving about in thpper windows. They must be awfully late then. People were gettineady for dinner. The house was all lit up, and the lights after tharkness made his eyes feel full, and he said to himself, childishlys he walked up the drive, Lights, lights, lights, and repeated in azed way, Lights, lights, lights, as they came into the house starinbout him with his face quite stiff. But, good heavens, he said timself, putting his hand to his tie, I must not make a fool oyself.)
15
"Yes," said Prue, in her considering way, answering her mother'uestion, "I think Nancy did go with them."
16
Well then, Nancy had gone with them, Mrs. Ramsay supposed, wondering, ahe put down a brush, took up a comb, and said "Come in" to a tap ahe door (Jasper and Rose came in), whether the fact that Nancy waith them made it less likely or more likely that anything woulappen; it made it less likely, somehow, Mrs. Ramsay felt, verrrationally, except that after all holocaust on such a scale was norobable. They could not all be drowned. And again she felt alone ihe presence of her old antagonist, life.
Jasper and Rose said that Mildred wanted to know whether she shoulait dinner.
"Not for the Queen of England," said Mrs. Ramsay emphatically.
"Not for the Empress of Mexico," she added, laughing at Jasper; for hhared his mother's vice: he, too, exaggerated.
And if Rose liked, she said, while Jasper took the message, she mighhoose which jewels she was to wear. When there are fifteen peoplitting down to dinner, one cannot keep things waiting for ever. Shas now beginning to feel annoyed with them for being so late; it wanconsiderate of them, and it annoyed her on top of her anxiety abouhem, that they should choose this very night to be out late, when, iact, she wished the dinner to be particularly nice, since Williaankes had at last consented to dine with them; and they were havinildred's masterpiece--BOEUF EN DAUBE. Everything depended upon thingeing served up to the precise moment they were ready. The beef, thayleaf, and the wine--all must be done to a turn. To keep it waitinas out of the question. Yet of course tonight, of all nights, ouhey went, and they came in late, and things had to be sent outhings had to be kept hot; the BOEUF EN DAUBE would be entirely spoilt.
Jasper offered her an opal necklace; Rose a gold necklace. Whicooked best against her black dress? Which did indeed, said Mrs. Ramsabsent-mindedly, looking at her neck and shoulders (but avoiding heace) in the glass. And then, while the children rummaged among hehings, she looked out of the window at a sight which always amuseer--the rooks trying to decide which tree to settle on. Every timehey seemed to change their minds and rose up into the air againecause, she thought, the old rook, the father rook, old Joseph was heame for him, was a bird of a very trying and difficult dispositione was a disreputable old bird, with half his wing feathers missinge was like some seedy old gentleman in a top hat she had seen playinhe horn in front of a public house.
"Look!" she said, laughing. They were actually fighting. Joseph anary were fighting. Anyhow they all went up again, and the air wahoved aside by their black wings and cut into exquisite scimitar shapeshe movements of the wings beating out, out, out--she could neveescribe it accurately enough to please herself--was one of thoveliest of all to her. Look at that, she said to Rose, hopinhat Rose would see it more clearly than she could. For one's childreo often gave one's own perceptions a little thrust forwards.
But which was it to be? They had all the trays of her jewel-caspen. The gold necklace, which was Italian, or the opal necklacehich Uncle James had brought her from India; or should she wear hemethysts?
"Choose, dearests, choose," she said, hoping that they would makaste.
But she let them take their time to choose: she let Rose, particularlyake up this and then that, and hold her jewels against the blacress, for this little ceremony of choosing jewels, which was gonhrough every night, was what Rose liked best, she knew. She had somidden reason of her own for attaching great importance to thihoosing what her mother was to wear. What was the reason, Mrs. Ramsaondered, standing still to let her clasp the necklace she had chosenivining, through her own past, some deep, some buried, some quitpeechless feeling that one had for one's mother at Rose's age. Likll feelings felt for oneself, Mrs. Ramsay thought, it made one sad. Ias so inadequate, what one could give in return; and what Rose felas quite out of proportion to anything she actually was. And Rosould grow up; and Rose would suffer, she supposed, with these deeeelings, and she said she was ready now, and they would go down, anasper, because he was the gentleman, should give her his arm, anose, as she was the lady, should carry her handkerchief (she gave hehe handkerchief), and what else? oh, yes, it might be cold: a shawlhoose me a shawl, she said, for that would please Rose, who was bouno suffer so. "There," she said, stopping by the window on thanding, "there they are again." Joseph had settled on another treeop. "Don't you think they mind," she said to Jasper, "having theiings broken?" Why did he want to shoot poor old Joseph and Mary? Hhuffled a little on the stairs, and felt rebuked, but not seriouslyor she did not understand the fun of shooting birds; and they did noeel; and being his mother she lived away in another division of thorld, but he rather liked her stories about Mary and Joseph. She madim laugh. But how did she know that those were Mary and Joseph? Dihe think the same birds came to the same trees every night? he askedut here, suddenly, like all grown-up people, she ceased to pay him theast attention. She was listening to a clatter in the hall.
"They've come back!" she exclaimed, and at once she felt much mornnoyed with them than relieved. Then she wondered, had it happenedhe would go down and they would tell her--but no. They could not teler anything, with all these people about. So she must go down anegin dinner and wait. And, like some queen who, finding her peoplathered in the hall, looks down upon them, and descends among themnd acknowledges their tributes silently, and accepts their devotiond their prostration before her (Paul did not move a muscle but looketraight before him as she passed) she went down, and crossed the halnd bowed her head very slightly, as if she accepted what they coulot say: their tribute to her beauty.
But she stopped. There was a smell of burning. Could they have let thOEUF EN DAUBE overboil? she wondered, pray heaven not! when threat clangour of the gong announced solemnly, authoritatively, thall those scattered about, in attics, in bedrooms, on little perches oheir own, reading, writing, putting the last smooth to their hair, oastening dresses, must leave all that, and the little odds and ends oheir washing-tables and dressing tables, and the novels on the bedables, and the diaries which were so private, and assemble in thining-room for dinner.
17
But what have I done with my life? thought Mrs. Ramsay, taking helace at the head of the table, and looking at all the plates makinhite circles on it. "William, sit by me," she said. "Lily," shaid, wearily, "over there." They had that--Paul Rayley and Mintoyle--she, only this--an infinitely long table and plates and knivest the far end was her husband, sitting down, all in a heap, frowninghat at? She did not know. She did not mind. She could nonderstand how she had ever felt any emotion or affection for him. Shad a sense of being past everything, through everything, out overything, as she helped the soup, as if there was an eddy--there-nd one could be in it, or one could be out of it, and she was out ot. It's all come to an end, she thought, while they came in one aftenother, Charles Tansley--"Sit there, please," she said--Augustuarmichael--and sat down. And meanwhile she waited, passively, foome one to answer her, for something to happen. But this is not hing, she thought, ladling out soup, that one says.
Raising her eyebrows at the discrepancy--that was what she wahinking, this was what she was doing--ladling out soup--she felt, mornd more strongly, outside that eddy; or as if a shade had fallen, andobbed of colour, she saw things truly. The room (she looked round itas very shabby. There was no beauty anywhere. She forebore to look ar. Tansley. Nothing seemed to have merged. They all sat separatend the whole of the effort of merging and flowing and creating resten her. Again she felt, as a fact without hostility, the sterility oen, for if she did not do it nobody would do it, and so, givinerself a little shake that one gives a watch that has stopped, the olamiliar pulse began beating, as the watch begins ticking--one, twohree, one, two, three. And so on and so on, she repeated, listenino it, sheltering and fostering the still feeble pulse as one mighuard a weak flame with a news-paper. And so then, she concludedddressing herself by bending silently in his direction to Williaankes--poor man! who had no wife, and no children and dined alone iodgings except for tonight; and in pity for him, life being now stronnough to bear her on again, she began all this business, as a sailoot without weariness sees the wind fill his sail and yet hardly wanto be off again and thinks how, had the ship sunk, he would havhirled round and round and found rest on the floor of the sea.
"Did you find your letters? I told them to put them in the hall foou," she said to William Bankes.
Lily Briscoe watched her drifting into that strange no-man's land whero follow people is impossible and yet their going inflicts such hill on those who watch them that they always try at least to follohem with their eyes as one follows a fading ship until the sails havunk beneath the horizon.
How old she looks, how worn she looks, Lily thought, and how remotehen when she turned to William Bankes, smiling, it was as if the shiad turned and the sun had struck its sails again, and Lily thoughith some amusement because she was relieved, Why does she pity himor that was the impression she gave, when she told him that hietters were in the hall. Poor William Bankes, she seemed to baying, as if her own weariness had been partly pitying people, and thife in her, her resolve to live again, had been stirred by pity. Ant was not true, Lily thought; it was one of those misjudgments of herhat seemed to be instinctive and to arise from some need of her owather than of other people's. He is not in the least pitiable. He hais work, Lily said to herself. She remembered, all of a sudden as ihe had found a treasure, that she had her work. In a flash she saer picture, and thought, Yes, I shall put the tree further in thiddle; then I shall avoid that awkward space. That's what I shall dohat's what has been puzzling me. She took up the salt cellar and put down again on a flower pattern in the table-cloth, so as to reminerself to move the tree.
"It's odd that one scarcely gets anything worth having by post, yet onlways wants one's letters," said Mr. Bankes.
What damned rot they talk, thought Charles Tansley, laying down hipoon precisely in the middle of his plate, which he had swept cleans if, Lily thought (he sat opposite to her with his back to the windorecisely in the middle of view), he were determined to make sure ois meals. Everything about him had that meagre fixity, that barnloveliness. But nevertheless, the fact remained, it was impossiblo dislike any one if one looked at them. She liked his eyes; theere blue, deep set, frightening.
"Do you write many letters, Mr. Tansley?" asked Mrs. Ramsay, pitying hioo, Lily supposed; for that was true of Mrs. Ramsay--she pitied melways as if they lacked something--women never, as if they haomething. He wrote to his mother; otherwise he did not suppose hrote one letter a month, said Mr. Tansley, shortly.
For he was not going to talk the sort of rot these condescended to bhese silly women. He had been reading in his room, and now he camown and it all seemed to him silly, superficial, flimsy. Why did theress? He had come down in his ordinary clothes. He had not got anress clothes. "One never gets anything worth having by post"--thaas the sort of thing they were always saying. They made men say thaort of thing. Yes, it was pretty well true, he thought. They neveot anything worth having from one year's end to another. They diothing but talk, talk, talk, eat, eat, eat. It was the women's faultomen made civilisation impossible with all their "charm," all theiilliness.
"No going to the Lighthouse tomorrow, Mrs. Ramsay," he said, assertinimself. He liked her; he admired her; he still thought of the man ihe drain-pipe looking up at her; but he felt it necessary to asserimself.
He was really, Lily Briscoe thought, in spite of his eyes, but theook at his nose, look at his hands, the most uncharming human beinhe had ever met. Then why did she mind what he said? Women can'rite, women can't paint--what did that matter coming from him, sinclearly it was not true to him but for some reason helpful to him, anhat was why he said it? Why did her whole being bow, like corn unde wind, and erect itself again from this abasement only with a greand rather painful effort? She must make it once more. There's thprig on the table-cloth; there's my painting; I must move the tree the middle; that matters--nothing else. Could she not hold fast that, she asked herself, and not lose her temper, and not argue; and ihe wanted revenge take it by laughing at him?
"Oh, Mr. Tansley," she said, "do take me to the Lighthouse with you. hould so love it."
She was telling lies he could see. She was saying what she did noean to annoy him, for some reason. She was laughing at him. He was iis old flannel trousers. He had no others. He felt very rough ansolated and lonely. He knew that she was trying to tease him for someason; she didn't want to go to the Lighthouse with him; she despiseim: so did Prue Ramsay; so did they all. But he was not going to bade a fool of by women, so he turned deliberately in his chair anooked out of the window and said, all in a jerk, very rudely, it woule too rough for her tomorrow. She would be sick.
It annoyed him that she should have made him speak like that, with Mrsamsay listening. If only he could be alone in his room working, hhought, among his books. That was where he felt at his ease. And had never run a penny into debt; he had never cost his father a pennince he was fifteen; he had helped them at home out of his savings; has educating his sister. Still, he wished he had known how to answeiss Briscoe properly; he wished it had not come out all in a jerk likhat. "You'd be sick." He wished he could think of something to say trs. Ramsay, something which would show her that he was not just a drrig. That was what they all thought him. He turned to her. But Mrsamsay was talking about people he had never heard of to Williaankes.
"Yes, take it away," she said briefly, interrupting what she was sayino William Bankes to speak to the maid. "It must have been fifteen-o, twenty years ago--that I last saw her," she was saying, turninack to him again as if she could not lose a moment of their talk, fohe was absorbed by what they were saying. So he had actually hearrom her this evening! And was Carrie still living at Marlow, and waverything still the same? Oh, she could remember it as if it weresterday--on the river, feeling it as if it were yesterday--going ohe river, feeling very cold. But if the Mannings made a plan thetuck to it. Never should she forget Herbert killing a wasp with easpoon on the bank! And it was still going on, Mrs. Ramsay musedliding like a ghost among the chairs and tables of that drawing-roon the banks of the Thames where she had been so very, very cold twentears ago; but now she went among them like a ghost; and it fascinateer, as if, while she had changed, that particular day, now become vertill and beautiful, had remained there, all these years. Had Carriritten to him herself? she asked.
"Yes. She says they're building a new billiard room," he said. Noo! That was out of the question! Building a new billiard roomt seemed to her impossible.
Mr. Bankes could not see that there was anything very odd about ithey were very well off now. Should he give her love to Carrie?
"Oh," said Mrs. Ramsay with a little start, "No," she added, reflectinhat she did not know this Carrie who built a new billiard room. Buow strange, she repeated, to Mr. Bankes's amusement, that they shoule going on there still. For it was extraordinary to think that thead been capable of going on living all these years when she had nohought of them more than once all that time. How eventful her owife had been, during those same years. Yet perhaps Carrie Manninad not thought about her, either. The thought was strange anistasteful.
"People soon drift apart," said Mr. Bankes, feeling, however, somatisfaction when he thought that after all he knew both the Manningnd the Ramsays. He had not drifted apart he thought, laying down hipoon and wiping his clean-shaven lips punctiliously. But perhaps has rather unusual, he thought, in this; he never let himself get int groove. He had friends in all circles... Mrs. Ramsay had to breaff here to tell the maid something about keeping food hot. That wahy he preferred dining alone. All those interruptions annoyed himell, thought William Bankes, preserving a demeanour of exquisitourtesy and merely spreading the fingers of his left hand on thable-cloth as a mechanic examines a tool beautifully polished aneady for use in an interval of leisure, such are the sacrifices one'riends ask of one. It would have hurt her if he had refused to comeut it was not worth it for him. Looking at his hand he thought thaf he had been alone dinner would have been almost over now; he woulave been free to work. Yes, he thought, it is a terrible waste oime. The children were dropping in still. "I wish one of you woulun up to Roger's room," Mrs. Ramsay was saying. How trifling it als, how boring it all is, he thought, compared with the other thing-ork. Here he sat drumming his fingers on the table-cloth when hight have been--he took a flashing bird's-eye view of his work. Wha waste of time it all was to be sure! Yet, he thought, she is one oy oldest friends. I am by way of being devoted to her. Yet now, ahis moment her presence meant absolutely nothing to him: her beauteant nothing to him; her sitting with her little boy at the window-othing, nothing. He wished only to be alone and to take up that booke felt uncomfortable; he felt treacherous, that he could sit by heide and feel nothing for her. The truth was that he did not enjoamily life. It was in this sort of state that one asked oneself, Whaoes one live for? Why, one asked oneself, does one take all thesains for the human race to go on? Is it so very desirable? Are wttractive as a species? Not so very, he thought, looking at thosather untidy boys. His favourite, Cam, was in bed, he supposedoolish questions, vain questions, questions one never askef one was occupied. Is human life this? Is human life that? Onever had time to think about it. But here he was asking himself thaort of question, because Mrs. Ramsay was giving orders to servants, anlso because it had struck him, thinking how surprised Mrs. Ramsay wahat Carrie Manning should still exist, that friendships, even the besf them, are frail things. One drifts apart. He reproached himselgain. He was sitting beside Mrs. Ramsay and he had nothing in thorld to say to her.
"I'm so sorry," said Mrs. Ramsy, turning to him at last. He felt rigind barren, like a pair of boots that have been soaked and gone dry shat you can hardly force your feet into them. Yet he must force hieet into them. He must make himself talk. Unless he were verareful, she would find out this treachery of his; that he did not car straw for her, and that would not be at all pleasant, he thought. Se bent his head courteously in her direction.
"How you must detest dining in this bear garden," she said, making uses she did when she was distracted, of her social manner. So, whehere is a strife of tongues, at some meeting, the chairman, to obtainity, suggests that every one shall speak in French. Perhaps it iad French; French may not contain the words that express the speaker'houghts; nevertheless speaking French imposes some order, somniformity. Replying to her in the same language, Mr. Bankes said, "Noot at all," and Mr. Tansley, who had no knowledge of this languageven spoke thus in words of one syllable, at once suspected itnsincerity. They did talk nonsense, he thought, the Ramsays; and hounced on this fresh instance with joy, making a note which, one ohese days, he would read aloud, to one or two friends. There, in ociety where one could say what one liked he would sarcasticallescribe "staying with the Ramsays" and what nonsense they talked. Ias worth while doing it once, he would say; but not again. The womeored one so, he would say. Of course Ramsay had dished himself barrying a beautiful woman and having eight children. It would shaptself something like that, but now, at this moment, sitting stuchere with an empty seat beside him, nothing had shaped itself at allt was all in scraps and fragments. He felt extremely, evehysically, uncomfortable. He wanted somebody to give him a chance osserting himself. He wanted it so urgently that he fidgeted in hihair, looked at this person, then at that person, tried to break intheir talk, opened his mouth and shut it again. They were talkinbout the fishing industry. Why did no one ask him his opinion? Whaid they know about the fishing industry?
Lily Briscoe knew all that. Sitting opposite him, could she not sees in an X-ray photograph, the ribs and thigh bones of the young man'esire to impress himself, lying dark in the mist of his flesh--thahin mist which convention had laid over his burning desire to breanto the conversation? But, she thought, screwing up her Chinesyes, and remembering how he sneered at women, "can't paint, can'rite," why should I help him to relieve himself?
There is a code of behaviour, she knew, whose seventh article (it mae) says that on occasions of this sort it behoves the woman, whateveer own occupation might be, to go to the help of the young mapposite so that he may expose and relieve the thigh bones, the ribsf his vanity, of his urgent desire to assert himself; as indeed it iheir duty, she reflected, in her old maidenly fairness, to help usuppose the Tube were to burst into flames. Then, she thought, I shoulertainly expect Mr. Tansley to get me out. But how would it be, shhought, if neither of us did either of these things? So she sat thermiling.
"You're not planning to go to the Lighthouse, are you, Lily," said Mrsamsay. "Remember poor Mr. Langley; he had been round the world dozenf times, but he told me he never suffered as he did when my husbanook him there. Are you a good sailor, Mr. Tansley?" she asked.
Mr. Tansley raised a hammer: swung it high in air; but realising, as iescended, that he could not smite that butterfly with such anstrument as this, said only that he had never been sick in his lifeut in that one sentence lay compact, like gunpowder, that hirandfather was a fisherman; his father a chemist; that he had workeis way up entirely himself; that he was proud of it; that he waharles Tansley--a fact that nobody there seemed to realise; but one ohese days every single person would know it. He scowled ahead of hime could almost pity these mild cultivated people, who would be blowky high, like bales of wool and barrels of apples, one of these dayy the gunpowder that was in him.
"Will you take me, Mr. Tansley?" said Lily, quickly, kindly, for, oourse, if Mrs. Ramsay said to her, as in effect she did, "I arowning, my dear, in seas of fire. Unless you apply some balm to thnguish of this hour and say something nice to that young man thereife will run upon the rocks--indeed I hear the grating and throwling at this minute. My nerves are taut as fiddle stringsnother touch and they will snap"--when Mrs. Ramsay said all this, ahe glance in her eyes said it, of course for the hundred and fiftietime Lily Briscoe had to renounce the experiment--what happens if ons not nice to that young man there--and be nice.
Judging the turn in her mood correctly--that she was friendly to hiow--he was relieved of his egotism, and told her how he had beehrown out of a boat when he was a baby; how his father used to fisim out with a boat-hook; that was how he had learnt to swim. One ois uncles kept the light on some rock or other off the Scottish coaste said. He had been there with him in a storm. This was said loudln a pause. They had to listen to him when he said that he had beeith his uncle in a lighthouse in a storm. Ah, thought Lily Briscoes the conversation took this auspicious turn, and she felt Mrsamsay's gratitude (for Mrs. Ramsay was free now to talk for a momenerself), ah, she thought, but what haven't I paid to get it for youhe had not been sincere.
She had done the usual trick--been nice. She would never know him. Hould never know her. Human relations were all like that, she thoughtnd the worst (if it had not been for Mr. Bankes) were between men anomen. Inevitably these were extremely insincere she thought. Theer eye caught the salt cellar, which she had placed there to reminer, and she remembered that next morning she would move the treurther towards the middle, and her spirits rose so high at the thoughf painting tomorrow that she laughed out loud at what Mr. Tansley waaying. Let him talk all night if he liked it.
"But how long do they leave men on a Lighthouse?" she asked. He toler. He was amazingly well informed. And as he was grateful, and ae liked her, and as he was beginning to enjoy himself, so now, Mrsamsay thought, she could return to that dream land, that unreal buascinating place, the Mannings' drawing-room at Marlow twenty yeargo; where one moved about without haste or anxiety, for there was nuture to worry about. She knew what had happened to them, what ter. It was like reading a good book again, for she knew the end ohat story, since it had happened twenty years ago, and life, whichot down even from this dining-room table in cascades, heaven knowhere, was sealed up there, and lay, like a lake, placidly between itanks. He said they had built a billiard room--was it possibleould William go on talking about the Mannings? She wanted him tout, no--for some reason he was no longer in the mood. She triede did not respond. She could not force him. She was disappointed.
"The children are disgraceful," she said, sighing. He said somethinbout punctuality being one of the minor virtues which we do nocquire until later in life.
"If at all," said Mrs. Ramsay merely to fill up space, thinking what ald maid William was becoming. Conscious of his treachery, consciouf her wish to talk about something more intimate, yet out of mood fot at present, he felt come over him the disagreeableness of lifeitting there, waiting. Perhaps the others were saying somethinnteresting? What were they saying?
That the fishing season was bad; that the men were emigrating. Theere talking about wages and unemployment. The young man was abusinhe government. William Bankes, thinking what a relief it was to catcn to something of this sort when private life was disagreeable, hearim say something about "one of the most scandalous acts of the presenovernment." Lily was listening; Mrs. Ramsay was listening; they werll listening. But already bored, Lily felt that something was lackingr. Bankes felt that something was lacking. Pulling her shawl round hers. Ramsay felt that something was lacking. All of them bendinhemselves to listen thought, "Pray heaven that the inside of my minay not be exposed," for each thought, "The others are feeling thishey are outraged and indignant with the government about thishermen. Whereas, I feel nothing at all." But perhaps, thought Mrankes, as he looked at Mr. Tansley, here is the man. One was alwayaiting for the man. There was always a chance. At any moment theader might arise; the man of genius, in politics as in anything elserobably he will be extremely disagreeable to us old fogies, thought Mrankes, doing his best to make allowances, for he knew by some curiouhysical sensation, as of nerves erect in his spine, that he waealous, for himself partly, partly more probably for his work, for hioint of view, for his science; and therefore he was not entirely openinded or altogether fair, for Mr. Tansley seemed to be saying, You havasted your lives. You are all of you wrong. Poor old fogies, you'ropelessly behind the times. He seemed to be rather cocksure, thioung man; and his manners were bad. But Mr. Bankes bade himselbserve, he had courage; he had ability; he was extremely well up ihe facts. Probably, Mr. Bankes thought, as Tansley abused thovernment, there is a good deal in what he says.
"Tell me now..." he said. So they argued about politics, and Lilooked at the leaf on the table-cloth; and Mrs. Ramsay, leaving thrgument entirely in the hands of the two men, wondered why she was sored by this talk, and wished, looking at her husband at the other enf the table, that he would say something. One word, she said terself. For if he said a thing, it would make all the difference. Hent to the heart of things. He cared about fishermen and their wagese could not sleep for thinking of them. It was altogether differenhen he spoke; one did not feel then, pray heaven you don't see hoittle I care, because one did care. Then, realising that it was becaushe admired him so much that she was waiting for him to speak, shelt as if somebody had been praising her husband to her and theiarriage, and she glowed all over withiut realising that it wahe herself who had praised him. She looked at him thinking to finhis in his face; he would be looking magnificent... But not in theast! He was screwing his face up, he was scowling and frowning, anlushing with anger. What on earth was it about? she wondered. Whaould be the matter? Only that poor old Augustus had asked fonother plate of soup--that was all. It was unthinkable, it waetestable (so he signalled to her across the table) that Augustuhould be beginning his soup over again. He loathed people eating whee had finished. She saw his anger fly like a pack of hounds into hiyes, his brow, and she knew that in a moment something violent woulxplode, and then--thank goodness! she saw him clutch himself and cla brake on the wheel, and the whole of his body seemed to emit sparkut not words. He sat there scowling. He had said nothing, he woulave her observe. Let her give him the credit for that! But whfter all should poor Augustus not ask for another plate of soup? Had merely touched Ellen's arm and said:
"Ellen, please, another plate of soup," and then Mr. Ramsay scowled likhat.
And why not? Mrs. Ramsay demanded. Surely they could let Augustus havis soup if he wanted it. He hated people wallowing in food, Mr. Ramsarowned at her. He hated everything dragging on for hours like thisut he had controlled himself, Mr. Ramsay would have her observeisgusting though the sight was. But why show it so plainly, Mrsamsay demanded (they looked at each other down the long table sendinhese questions and answers across, each knowing exactly what the otheelt). Everybody could see, Mrs. Ramsay thought. There was Rose gazint her father, there was Roger gazing at his father; both would be ofn spasms of laughter in another second, she knew, and so she sairomptly (indeed it was time):
"Light the candles," and they jumped up instantly and went and fumblet the sideboard.
Why could he never conceal his feelings? Mrs. Ramsay wondered, and shondered if Augustus Carmichael had noticed. Perhaps he had; perhape had not. She could not help respecting the composure with which hat there, drinking his soup. If he wanted soup, he asked for souphether people laughed at him or were angry with him he was the samee did not like her, she knew that; but partly for that very reason shespected him, and looking at him, drinking soup, very large and caln the failing light, and monumental, and contemplative, she wonderehat he did feel then, and why he was always content and dignified; anhe thought how devoted he was to Andrew, and would call him into hioom, and Andrew said, "show him things." And there he would lie alay long on the lawn brooding presumably over his poetry, till heminded one of a cat watching birds, and then he clapped his pawogether when he had found the word, and her husband said, "Poor olugustus--he's a true poet," which was high praise from her husband.
Now eight candles were stood down the table, and after the first stoohe flames stood upright and drew with them into visibility the lonable entire, and in the middle a yellow and purple dish of fruit. Whaad she done with it, Mrs. Ramsay wondered, for Rose's arrangement ohe grapes and pears, of the horny pink-lined shell, of the bananasade her think of a trophy fetched from the bottom of the sea, oeptune's banquet, of the bunch that hangs with vine leaves over thhoulder of Bacchus (in some picture), among the leopard skins and thorches lolloping red and gold... Thus brought up suddenly into thight it seemed possessed of great size and depth, was like a world ihich one could take one's staff and climb hills, she thought, and gown into valleys, and to her pleasure (for it brought them intympathy momentarily) she saw that Augustus too feasted his eyes on thame plate of fruit, plunged in, broke off a bloom there, a tasseere, and returned, after feasting, to his hive. That was his way oooking, different from hers. But looking together united them.
Now all the candles were lit up, and the faces on both sides of thable were brought nearer by the candle light, and composed, as thead not been in the twilight, into a party round a table, for the nighas now shut off by panes of glass, which, far from giving any accuratiew of the outside world, rippled it so strangely that here, insidhe room, seemed to be order and dry land; there, outside, a reflection which things waved and vanished, waterily.
Some change at once went through them all, as if this had reallappened, and they were all conscious of making a party together in ollow, on an island; had their common cause against that fluidity ouhere. Mrs. Ramsay, who had been uneasy, waiting for Paul and Minta tome in, and unable, she felt, to settle to things, now felt heneasiness changed to expectation. For now they must come, and Lilriscoe, trying to analyse the cause of the sudden exhilarationompared it with that moment on the tennis lawn, when solidity suddenlanished, and such vast spaces lay between them; and now the samffect was got by the many candles in the sparely furnished room, anhe uncurtained windows, and the bright mask-like look of faces seen bandlelight. Some weight was taken off them; anything might happenhe felt. They must come now, Mrs. Ramsay thought, looking at the doornd at that instant, Minta Doyle, Paul Rayley, and a maid carrying reat dish in her hands came in together. They were awfully late; theere horribly late, Minta said, as they found their way to differennds of the table.
"I lost my brooch--my grandmother's brooch," said Minta with a sound oamentation in her voice, and a suffusion in her large brown eyesooking down, looking up, as she sat by Mr. Ramsay, which roused hihivalry so that he bantered her.
How could she be such a goose, he asked, as to scramble about the rockn jewels?
She was by way of being terrified of him--he was so fearfully clevernd the first night when she had sat by him, and he talked about Georgliot, she had been really frightened, for she had left the thirolume of MIDDLEMARCH in the train and she never knew what happened ihe end; but afterwards she got on perfectly, and made herself out eveore ignorant than she was, because he liked telling her she was ool. And so tonight, directly he laughed at her, she was norightened. Besides, she knew, directly she came into the room that thiracle had happened; she wore her golden haze. Sometimes she had itometimes not. She never knew why it came or why it went, or if shad it until she came into the room and then she knew instantly by thay some man looked at her. Yes, tonight she had it, tremendously; shnew that by the way Mr. Ramsay told her not to be a fool. She saeside him, smiling.
It must have happened then, thought Mrs. Ramsay; they are engaged. Anor a moment she felt what she had never expected to feel again-ealousy. For he, her husband, felt it too--Minta's glow; he likehese girls, these golden-reddish girls, with something flyingomething a little wild and harum-scarum about them, who didn'scrape their hair off," weren't, as he said about poor Lily Briscoeskimpy". There was some quality which she herself had not, somustre, some richness, which attracted him, amused him, led him to makavourites of girls like Minta. They might cut his hair from himlait him watch-chains, or interrupt him at his work, hailing him (sheard them), "Come along, Mr. Ramsay; it's our turn to beat them now,nd out he came to play tennis.
But indeed she was not jealous, only, now and then, when she maderself look in her glass, a little resentful that she had grown olderhaps, by her own fault. (The bill for the greenhouse and all thest of it.) She was grateful to them for laughing at him. ("How manipes have you smoked today, Mr. Ramsay?" and so on), till he seemed oung man; a man very attractive to women, not burdened, not weigheown with the greatness of his labours and the sorrows of the world anis fame or his failure, but again as she had first known him, gaunut gallant; helping her out of a boat, she remembered; with delightfuays, like that (she looked at him, and he looked astonishingly youngeasing Minta). For herself--"Put it down there," she said, helpinhe Swiss girl to place gently before her the huge brown pot in whicas the BOEUF EN DAUBE--for her own part, she liked her boobies. Pauust sit by her. She had kept a place for him. Really, she sometimehought she liked the boobies best. They did not bother one with theiissertations. How much they missed, after all, these very clever menow dried up they did become, to be sure. There was something, shhought as he sat down, very charming about Paul. His manners werelightful to her, and his sharp cut nose and his bright blue eyes. Has so considerate. Would he tell her--now that they were all talkingain--what had happened?
"We went back to look for Minta's brooch," he said, sitting down ber. "We"--that was enough. She knew from the effort, the rise in hioice to surmount a difficult word that it was the first time he haaid "we." "We did this, we did that." They'll say that all theiives, she thought, and an exquisite scent of olives and oil and juicose from the great brown dish as Marthe, with a little flourish, toohe cover off. The cook had spent three days over that dish. And shust take great care, Mrs. Ramsay thought, diving into the soft mass, thoose a specially tender piece for William Bankes. And she peered inthe dish, with its shiny walls and its confusion of savoury brown anellow meats and its bay leaves and its wine, and thought, This wilelebrate the occasion--a curious sense rising in her, at once freakisnd tender, of celebrating a festival, as if two emotions were callep in her, one profound--for what could be more serious than the lovf man for woman, what more commanding, more impressive, bearing in itosom the seeds of death; at the same time these lovers, these peoplntering into illusion glittering eyed, must be danced round witockery, decorated with garlands.
"It is a triumph," said Mr. Bankes, laying his knife down for a momente had eaten attentively. It was rich; it was tender. It was perfectlooked. How did she manage these things in the depths of the countrye asked her. She was a wonderful woman. All his love, all hieverence, had returned; and she knew it.
"It is a French recipe of my grandmother's," said Mrs. Ramsay, speakinith a ring of great pleasure in her voice. Of course it was Frenchhat passes for cookery in England is an abomination (they agreed). Is putting cabbages in water. It is roasting meat till it is likeather. It is cutting off the delicious skins of vegetables. "Ihich," said Mr. Bankes, "all the virtue of the vegetable is contained.nd the waste, said Mrs. Ramsay. A whole French family could live ohat an English cook throws away. Spurred on by her sense thailliam's affection had come back to her, and that everything was alight again, and that her suspense was over, and that now she was freoth to triumph and to mock, she laughed, she gesticulated, till Lilhought, How childlike, how absurd she was, sitting up there with aler beauty opened again in her, talking about the skins of vegetableshere was something frightening about her. She was irresistiblelways she got her own way in the end, Lily thought. Now she harought this off--Paul and Minta, one might suppose, were engaged. Mrankes was dining here. She put a spell on them all, by wishing, simply, so directly, and Lily contrasted that abundance with her owoverty of spirit, and supposed that it was partly that belief (for heace was all lit up--without looking young, she looked radiant) in thitrange, this terrifying thing, which made Paul Rayley, sitting at heide, all of a tremor, yet abstract, absorbed, silent. Mrs. Ramsayily felt, as she talked about the skins of vegetables, exalted thatorshipped that; held her hands over it to warm them, to protect itnd yet, having brought it all about, somehow laughed, led her victimsily felt, to the altar. It came over her too now--the emotion, thibration, of love. How inconspicuous she felt herself by Paul's sidee, glowing, burning; she, aloof, satirical; he, bound for adventurehe, moored to the shore; he, launched, incautious; she solitaryeft out--and, ready to implore a share, if it were a disaster, iis disaster, she said shyly:
"When did Minta lose her brooch?"
He smiled the most exquisite smile, veiled by memory, tinged by dreamse shook his head. "On the beach," he said.
"I'm going to find it," he said, "I'm getting up early." This beinept secret from Minta, he lowered his voice, and turned his eyes there she sat, laughing, beside Mr. Ramsay.
Lily wanted to protest violently and outrageously her desire to helim, envisaging how in the dawn on the beach she would be the one tounce on the brooch half-hidden by some stone, and thus herself bncluded among the sailors and adventurers. But what did he reply ter offer? She actually said with an emotion that she seldom leppear, "Let me come with you," and he laughed. He meant yes or no-ither perhaps. But it was not his meaning--it was the odd chuckle gave, as if he had said, Throw yourself over the cliff if you like don't care. He turned on her cheek the heat of love, its horror, itruelty, its unscrupulosity. It scorched her, and Lily, looking ainta, being charming to Mr. Ramsay at the other end of the tablelinched for her exposed to these fangs, and was thankful. For at anate, she said to herself, catching sight of the salt cellar on thattern, she need not marry, thank Heaven: she need not undergo thaegradation. She was saved from that dilution. She would move the treather more to the middle.
Such was the complexity of things. For what happened to herspecially staying with the Ramsays, was to be made to feel violentlwo opposite things at the same time; that's what you feel, was onehat's what I feel, was the other, and then they fought together in heind, as now. It is so beautiful, so exciting, this love, that remble on the verge of it, and offer, quite out of my own habit, took for a brooch on a beach; also it is the stupidest, the mosarbaric of human passions, and turns a nice young man with a profilike a gem's (Paul's was exquisite) into a bully with a crowbar (has swaggering, he was insolent) in the Mile End Road. Yet, she said terself, from the dawn of time odes have been sung to love; wreatheaped and roses; and if you asked nine people out of ten they woulay they wanted nothing but this--love; while the women, judging froer own experience, would all the time be feeling, This is not what want; there is nothing more tedious, puerile, and inhumane than thiset it is also beautiful and necessary. Well then, well then? shsked, somehow expecting the others to go on with the argument, as in an argument like this one threw one's own little bolt which felhort obviously and left the others to carry it on. So she listenegain to what they were saying in case they should throw any light upohe question of love.
"Then," said Mr. Bankes, "there is that liquid the English call coffee."
"Oh, coffee!" said Mrs. Ramsay. But it was much rather a question (shas thoroughly roused, Lily could see, and talked very emphatically) oeal butter and clean milk. Speaking with warmth and eloquence, shescribed the iniquity of the English dairy system, and in what statilk was delivered at the door, and was about to prove her charges, fohe had gone into the matter, when all round the table, beginning witndrew in the middle, like a fire leaping from tuft to tuft of furzeer children laughed; her husband laughed; she was laughed at, firencircled, and forced to veil her crest, dismount her batteries, annly retaliate by displaying the raillery and ridicule of the tablo Mr. Bankes as an example of what one suffered if one attacked threjudices of the British Public.
Purposely, however, for she had it on her mind that Lily, who haelped her with Mr. Tansley, was out of things, she exempted her frohe rest; said "Lily anyhow agrees with me," and so drew her in, ittle fluttered, a little startled. (For she was thinking abouove.) They were both out of things, Mrs. Ramsay had been thinkingoth Lily and Charles Tansley. Both suffered from the glow of thther two. He, it was clear, felt himself utterly in the cold; noman would look at him with Paul Rayley in the room. Poor fellowtill, he had his dissertation, the influence of somebody upoomething: he could take care of himself. With Lily it was differenthe faded, under Minta's glow; became more inconspicuous than ever, ier little grey dress with her little puckered face and her littlhinese eyes. Everything about her was so small. Yet, thought Mrsamsay, comparing her with Minta, as she claimed her help (for Lilhould bear her out she talked no more about her dairies than heusband did about his boots--he would talk by the hour about his bootsf the two, Lily at forty will be the better. There was in Lily hread of something; a flare of something; something of her own whicrs. Ramsay liked very much indeed, but no man would, she fearedbviously, not, unless it were a much older man, like William Bankesut then he cared, well, Mrs. Ramsay sometimes thought that he caredince his wife's death, perhaps for her. He was not "in love" oourse; it was one of those unclassified affections of which there aro many. Oh, but nonsense, she thought; William must marry Lily. Theave so many things in common. Lily is so fond of flowers. They aroth cold and aloof and rather self-sufficing. She must arrange fohem to take a long walk together.
Foolishly, she had set them opposite each other. That could be remedieomorrow. If it were fine, they should go for a picnic. Everythineemed possible. Everything seemed right. Just now (but this cannoast, she thought, dissociating herself from the moment while they werll talking about boots) just now she had reached security; she hovereike a hawk suspended; like a flag floated in an element of joy whicilled every nerve of her body fully and sweetly, not noisily, solemnlather, for it arose, she thought, looking at them all eating thererom husband and children and friends; all of which rising in thirofound stillness (she was helping William Bankes to one very smaliece more, and peered into the depths of the earthenware pot) seemeow for no special reason to stay there like a smoke, like a fumising upwards, holding them safe together. Nothing need be saidothing could be said. There it was, all round them. It partook, shelt, carefully helping Mr. Bankes to a specially tender piece, oternity; as she had already felt about something different once beforhat afternoon; there is a coherence in things, a stability; somethinghe meant, is immune from change, and shines out (she glanced at thindow with its ripple of reflected lights) in the face of the flowinghe fleeting, the spectral, like a ruby; so that again tonight she hahe feeling she had had once today, already, of peace, of rest. Ouch moments, she thought, the thing is made that endures.
"Yes," she assured William Bankes, "there is plenty for everybody."
"Andrew," she said, "hold your plate lower, or I shall spill it." (ThOEUF EN DAUBE was a perfect triumph.) Here, she felt, putting thpoon down, where one could move or rest; could wait now (they were alelped) listening; could then, like a hawk which lapses suddenly frots high station, flaunt and sink on laughter easily, resting her wholeight upon what at the other end of the table her husband was sayinbout the square root of one thousand two hundred and fifty-threehat was the number, it seemed, on his watch.
What did it all mean? To this day she had no notion. A square roothat was that? Her sons knew. She leant on them; on cubes and squaroots; that was what they were talking about now; on Voltaire anadame de Stael; on the character of Napoleon; on the French system oand tenure; on Lord Rosebery; on Creevey's Memoirs: she let it upholer and sustain her, this admirable fabric of the masculinntelligence, which ran up and down, crossed this way and that, likron girders spanning the swaying fabric, upholding the world, so thahe could trust herself to it utterly, even shut her eyes, or flickehem for a moment, as a child staring up from its pillow winks at thyriad layers of the leaves of a tree. Then she woke up. It was stileing fabricated. William Bankes was praising the Waverly novels.
He read one of them every six months, he said. And why should that makharles Tansley angry? He rushed in (all, thought Mrs. Ramsay, becausrue will not be nice to him) and denounced the Waverly novels when hnew nothing about it, nothing about it whatsoever, Mrs. Ramsay thoughtbserving him rather than listening to what he said. She could see hot was from his manner--he wanted to assert himself, and so it woullways be with him till he got his Professorship or married his wifend so need not be always saying, "I--I--I." For that was what hiriticism of poor Sir Walter, or perhaps it was Jane Austen, amounteo. "I---I---I." He was thinking of himself and the impression has making, as she could tell by the sound of his voice, and himphasis and his uneasiness. Success would be good for him. At anate they were off again. Now she need not listen. It could not lasthe knew, but at the moment her eyes were so clear that they seemed to round the table unveiling each of these people, and their thoughtnd their feelings, without effort like a light stealing under water shat its ripples and the reeds in it and the minnows balancinhemselves, and the sudden silent trout are all lit up hangingrembling. So she saw them; she heard them; but whatever they said halso this quality, as if what they said was like the movement of rout when, at the same time, one can see the ripple and the gravelomething to the right, something to the left; and the whole is helogether; for whereas in active life she would be netting aneparating one thing from another; she would be saying she liked thaverly novels or had not read them; she would be urging herselorward; now she said nothing. For the moment, she hung suspended.
"Ah, but how long do you think it'll last?" said somebody. It was af she had antennae trembling out from her, which, intercepting certaientences, forced them upon her attention. This was one of them. Shcented danger for her husband. A question like that would leadlmost certainly, to something being said which reminded him of his owailure. How long would he be read--he would think at once. Williaankes (who was entirely free from all such vanity) laughed, and saie attached no importance to changes in fashion. Who could tell whaas going to last--in literature or indeed in anything else?
"Let us enjoy what we do enjoy," he said. His integrity seemed to Mrsamsay quite admirable. He never seemed for a moment to think, But hooes this affect me? But then if you had the other temperament, whicust have praise, which must have encouragement, naturally you begaand she knew that Mr. Ramsay was beginning) to be uneasy; to wanomebody to say, Oh, but your work will last, Mr. Ramsay, or somethinike that. He showed his uneasiness quite clearly now by saying, witome irritation, that, anyhow, Scott (or was it Shakespeare ?) woulast him his lifetime. He said it irritably. Everybody, she thoughtelt a little uncomfortable, without knowing why. Then Minta Doylehose instinct was fine, said bluffly, absurdly, that she did noelieve that any one really enjoyed reading Shakespeare. Mr. Ramsaaid grimly (but his mind was turned away again) that very few peopliked it as much as they said they did. But, he added, there ionsiderable merit in some of the plays nevertheless, and Mrs. Ramsaaw that it would be all right for the moment anyhow; he would laugh ainta, and she, Mrs. Ramsay saw, realising his extreme anxiety abouimself, would, in her own way, see that he was taken care of, anraise him, somehow or other. But she wished it was not necessaryerhaps it was her fault that it was necessary. Anyhow, she was freow to listen to what Paul Rayley was trying to say about books one haead as a boy. They lasted, he said. He had read some of Tolstoi achool. There was one he always remembered, but he had forgotten thame. Russian names were impossible, said Mrs. Ramsay. "Vronsky," saiaul. He remembered that because he always thought it such a good namor a villain. "Vronsky," said Mrs. Ramsay; "Oh, ANNA KARENINA," buhat did not take them very far; books were not in their line. Noharles Tansley would put them both right in a second about books, but was all so mixed up with, Am I saying the right thing? Am I makin good impression? that, after all, one knew more about him thabout Tolstoi, whereas, what Paul said was about the thing, simply, noimself, nothing else. Like all stupid people, he had a kind oodesty too, a consideration for what you were feeling, which, once i way at least, she found attractive. Now he was thinking, not abouimself, or about Tolstoi, but whether she was cold, whether she felt raught, whether she would like a pear.
No, she said, she did not want a pear. Indeed she had been keepinuard over the dish of fruit (without realising it) jealously, hopinhat nobody would touch it. Her eyes had been going in and out amonhe curves and shadows of the fruit, among the rich purples of thowland grapes, then over the horny ridge of the shell, putting ellow against a purple, a curved shape against a round shape, withounowing why she did it, or why, every time she did it, she felt mornd more serene; until, oh, what a pity that they should do it--a haneached out, took a pear, and spoilt the whole thing. In sympathy shooked at Rose. She looked at Rose sitting between Jasper and Prueow odd that one's child should do that!
How odd to see them sitting there, in a row, her children, Jasperose, Prue, Andrew, almost silent, but with some joke of their owoing on, she guessed, from the twitching at their lips. It waomething quite apart from everything else, something they weroarding up to laugh over in their own room. It was not about theiather, she hoped. No, she thought not. What was it, she wonderedadly rather, for it seemed to her that they would laugh when she waot there. There was all that hoarded behind those rather set, stillask-like faces, for they did not join in easily; they were likatchers, surveyors, a little raised or set apart  from the grown-ueople. But when she looked at Prue tonight, she saw that this waot now quite true of her. She was just beginning, just movingust descending. The faintest light was on her face, as if thlow of Minta opposite, some excitement, some anticipation of happinesas reflected in her, as if the sun of the love of men and women rosver the rim of the table-cloth, and without knowing what it was shent towards it and greeted it. She kept looking at Minta, shyly, yeuriously, so that Mrs. Ramsay looked from one to the other and saidpeaking to Prue in her own mind, You will be as happy as she is one ohese days. You will be much happier, she added, because you are maughter, she meant; her own daughter must be happier than otheeople's daughters. But dinner was over. It was time to go. Theere only playing with things on their plates. She would wait untihey had done laughing at some story her husband was telling. He waaving a joke with Minta about a bet. Then she would get up.
She liked Charles Tansley, she thought, suddenly; she liked his laughhe liked him for being so angry with Paul and Minta. She liked hiwkwardness. There was a lot in that young man after all. And Lilyhe thought, putting her napkin beside her plate, she always has somoke of her own. One need never bother about Lily. She waited. Shucked her napkin under the edge of her plate. Well, were they donow? No. That story had led to another story. Her husband was ireat spirits tonight, and wishing, she supposed, to make it all righith old Augustus after that scene about the soup, had drawn him in-hey were telling stories about some one they had both known aollege. She looked at the window in which the candle flames burnrighter now that the panes were black, and looking at that outsidhe voices came to her very strangely, as if they were voices at ervice in a cathedral, for she did not listen to the words. Thudden bursts of laughter and then one voice (Minta's) speakinlone, reminded her of men and boys crying out the Latin wordf a service in some Roman Catholic cathedral. She waited. Heusband spoke. He was repeating something, and she knew it was poetrrom the rhythm and the ring of exultation, and melancholy in hioice:
Come out and climb the garden path, Luriana Lurileehe China rose is all abloom and buzzing with the yellow bee.
The words (she was looking at the window) sounded as if they werloating like flowers on water out there, cut off from them all, as io one had said them, but they had come into existence of themselves.
And all the lives we ever lived and all the lives to bre full of trees and changing leaves.
She did not know what they meant, but, like music, the words seemed te spoken by her own voice, outside her self, saying quite easily anaturally what had been in her mind the whole evening while she saiifferent things. She knew, without looking round, that every one ahe table was listening to the voice saying:
I wonder if it seems to you, Luriana, Lurilee
with the same sort of relief and pleasure that she had, as if thiere, at last, the natural thing to say, this were their own voicpeaking.
But the voice had stopped. She looked round. She made herself get upugustus Carmichael had risen and, holding his table napkin so that iooked like a long white robe he stood chanting:
To see the Kings go riding bver lawn and daisy leith their palm leaves and cedauriana, Lurilee,
and as she passed him, he turned slightly towards her repeating thast words:
Luriana, Lurilee
and bowed to her as if he did her homage. Without knowing why, shelt that he liked her better than he ever had done before; and with eeling of relief and gratitude she returned his bow and passed throughe door which he held open for her.
It was necessary now to carry everything a step further. With her foon the threshold she waited a moment longer in a scene which waanishing even as she looked, and then, as she moved and took Minta'rm and left the room, it changed, it shaped itself differently; it haecome, she knew, giving one last look at it over her shoulder, alreadhe past.
18
As usual, Lily thought. There was always something that had to be dont that precise moment, something that Mrs. Ramsay had decided foeasons of her own to do instantly, it might be with every one standinbout making jokes, as now, not being able to decide whether they weroing into the smoking-room, into the drawing-room, up to the atticshen one saw Mrs. Ramsay in the midst of this hubbub standing there witinta's arm in hers, bethink her, "Yes, it is time for that now," ano make off at once with an air of secrecy to do something alone. Anirectly she went a sort of disintegration set in; they wavered aboutent different ways, Mr. Bankes took Charles Tansley by the arm and wenff to finish on the terrace the discussion they had begun at dinnebout politics, thus giving a turn to the whole poise of the eveningaking the weight fall in a different direction, as if, Lily thoughteeing them go, and hearing a word or two about the policy of thabour Party, they had gone up on to the bridge of the ship and weraking their bearings; the change from poetry to politics struck heike that; so Mr. Bankes and Charles Mrs. Ramsay going upstairs in thamplight alone. Where, Lily wondered, was she going so quickly?
Not that she did in fact run or hurry; she went indeed rather slowlyhe felt rather inclined just for a moment to stand still after alhat chatter, and pick out one particular thing; the thing thaattered; to detach it; separate it off; clean it of all the emotionnd odds and ends of things, and so hold it before her, and bring it the tribunal where, ranged about in conclave, sat the judges she haet up to decide these things. Is it good, is it bad, is it right orong? Where are we all going to? and so on. So she righteerself after the shock of the event, and quite unconsciously anncongruously, used the branches of the elm trees outside to help heo stabilise her position. Her world was changing: they were stillhe event had given her a sense of movement. All must be in orderhe must get that right and that right, she thought, insensiblpproving of the dignity of the trees' stillness, and now again of thuperb upward rise (like the beak of a ship up a wave) of the elranches as the wind raised them. For it was windy (she stood a momeno look out). It was windy, so that the leaves now and then brushepen a star, and the stars themselves seemed to be shaking and dartinight and trying to flash out between the edges of the leaves. Yeshat was done then, accomplished; and as with all things done, becamolemn. Now one thought of it, cleared of chatter and emotion, ieemed always to have been, only was shown now and so being showntruck everything into stability. They would, she thought, going ogain, however long they lived, come back to this night; this moonhis wind; this house: and to her too. It flattered her, where she waost susceptible of flattery, to think how, wound about in theiearts, however long they lived she would be woven; and this, and thisnd this, she thought, going upstairs, laughing, but affectionately, ahe sofa on the landing (her mother's); at the rocking-chair (heather's); at the map of the Hebrides. All that would be revived again the lives of Paul and Minta; "the Rayleys"--she tried the new namver; and she felt, with her hand on the nursery door, that communitf feeling with other people which emotion gives as if the walls oartition had become so thin that practically (the feeling was one oelief and happiness) it was all one stream, and chairs, tables, mapsere hers, were theirs, it did not matter whose, and Paul and Mintould carry it on when she was dead.
She turned the handle, firmly, lest it should squeak, and went inursing her lips slightly, as if to remind herself that she must nopeak aloud. But directly she came in she saw, with annoyance, that threcaution was not needed. The children were not asleep. It was mosnnoying. Mildred should be more careful. There was James wide awaknd Cam sitting bolt upright, and Mildred out of bed in her bare feetnd it was almost eleven and they were all talking. What was thatter? It was that horrid skull again. She had told Mildred to movt, but Mildred, of course, had forgotten, and now there was Cam widwake, and James wide awake quarreling when they ought to have beesleep hours ago. What had possessed Edward to send them this horrikull? She had been so foolish as to let them nail it up there. Ias nailed fast, Mildred said, and Cam couldn't go to sleep with it ihe room, and James screamed if she touched it.
Then Cam must go to sleep (it had great horns said Cam)--must go tleep and dream of lovely palaces, said Mrs. Ramsay, sitting down the bed by her side. She could see the horns, Cam said, all ovehe room. It was true. Wherever they put the light (and James coulot sleep without a light) there was always a shadow somewhere.
"But think, Cam, it's only an old pig," said Mrs. Ramsay, "a nice blacig like the pigs at the farm." But Cam thought it was a horrid thingranching at her all over the room.
"Well then," said Mrs. Ramsay, "we will cover it up," and they alatched her go to the chest of drawers, and open the little draweruickly one after another, and not seeing anything that would do, shuickly took her own shawl off and wound it round the skull, round anound and round, and then she came back to Cam and laid her head almoslat on the pillow beside Cam's and said how lovely it looked now; hohe fairies would love it; it was like a bird's nest; it was like eautiful mountain such as she had seen abroad, with valleys anlowers and bells ringing and birds singing and little goats anntelopes and... She could see the words echoing as she spoke thehythmically in Cam's mind, and Cam was repeating after her how it waike a mountain, a bird's nest, a garden, and there were littlntelopes, and her eyes were opening and shutting, and Mrs. Ramsay wenn speaking still more monotonously, and more rhythmically and moronsensically, how she must shut her eyes and go to sleep and dream oountains and valleys and stars falling and parrots and antelopes anardens, and everything lovely, she said, raising her head very slowlnd speaking more and more mechanically, until she sat upright and sahat Cam was asleep.
Now, she whispered, crossing over to his bed, James must go to sleeoo, for see, she said, the boar's skull was still there; they had noouched it; they had done just what he wanted; it was there quitnhurt. He made sure that the skull was still there under the shawlut he wanted to ask her something more. Would they go to the Lighthousomorrow?
No, not tomorrow, she said, but soon, she promised him; the next finay. He was very good. He lay down. She covered him up. But hould never forget, she knew, and she felt angry with Charles Tansleyith her husband, and with herself, for she had raised his hopes. Theeeling for her shawl and remembering that she had wrapped it round thoar's skull, she got up, and pulled the window down another inch owo, and heard the wind, and got a breath of the perfectly indifferenhill night air and murmured good night to Mildred and left the roond let the tongue of the door slowly lengthen in the lock and wenut.
She hoped he would not bang his books on the floor above their headshe thought, still thinking how annoying Charles Tansley was. Foeither of them slept well; they were excitable children, and since haid things like that about the Lighthouse, it seemed to her likelhat he would knock a pile of books over, just as they were going tleep, clumsily sweeping them off the table with his elbow. For shupposed that he had gone upstairs to work. Yet he looked so desolateet she would feel relieved when he went; yet she would see that he waetter treated tomorrow; yet he was admirable with her husband; yet hianners certainly wanted improving; yet she liked his laugh--thinkinhis, as she came downstairs, she noticed that she could now see thoon itself through the staircase window--the yellow harvest moon-nd turned, and they saw her, standing above them on the stairs.
"That's my mother," thought Prue. Yes; Minta should look at her; Pauayley should look at her. That is the thing itself, she felt, as ihere were only one person like that in the world; her mother. Androm having been quite grown up, a moment before, talking with ththers, she became a child again, and what they had been doing was ame, and would her mother sanction their game, or condemn it, shondered. And thinking what a chance it was for Minta and Paul anily to see her, and feeling what an extraordinary stroke of fortune ias for her, to have her, and how she would never grow up and neveeave home, she said, like a child, "We thought of going down to theach to watch the waves."
Instantly, for no reason at all, Mrs. Ramsay became like a girl owenty, full of gaiety. A mood of revelry suddenly took possession oer. Of course they must go; of course they must go, she criedaughing; and running down the last three or four steps quickly, shegan turning from one to the other and laughing and drawing Minta'rap round her and saying she only wished she could come too, and woulhey be very late, and had any of them got a watch?
"Yes, Paul has," said Minta. Paul slipped a beautiful gold watch ouf a little wash-leather case to show her. And as he held it in thalm of his hand before her, he felt, "She knows all about it. I neeot say anything." He was saying to her as he showed her the watchI've done it, Mrs. Ramsay. I owe it all to you." And seeing the golatch lying in his hand, Mrs. Ramsay felt, How extraordinarily luckinta is! She is marrying a man who has a gold watch in a washeather bag!
"How I wish I could come with you!" she cried. But she was withheld bomething so strong that she never even thought of asking herself what was. Of course it was impossible for her to go with them. But should have liked to go, had it not been for the other thing, anickled by the absurdity of her thought (how lucky to marry a maith a wash-leather bag for his watch) she went with a smile on heips into the other room, where her husband sat reading.
19
Of course, she said to herself, coming into the room, she had to comere to get something she wanted. First she wanted to sit down in articular chair under a particular lamp. But she wanted somethinore, though she did not know, could not think what it was that shanted. She looked at her husband (taking up her stocking aneginning to knit), and saw that he did not want to be interrupted-hat was clear. He was reading something that moved him very much. Has half smiling and then she knew he was controlling his emotion. Has tossing the pages over. He was acting it--perhaps he wahinking himself the person in the book. She wondered what book it wash, it was one of old Sir Walter's she saw, adjusting the shade of heamp so that the light fell on her knitting. For Charles Tansley haeen saying (she looked up as if she expected to hear the crash oooks on the floor above), had been saying that people don't read Scotny more. Then her husband thought, "That's what they'll say of me;o he went and got one of those books. And if he came to thonclusion "That's true" what Charles Tansley said, he would accept ibout Scott. (She could see that he was weighing, considering, puttinhis with that as he read.) But not about himself. He was alwayneasy about himself. That troubled her. He would always be worryinbout his own books--will they be read, are they good, why aren't theetter, what do people think of me? Not liking to think of him sond wondering if they had guessed at dinner why he suddenly becamrritable when they talked about fame and books lasting, wondering ihe children were laughing at that, she twitched the stockings out, anll the fine gravings came drawn with steel instruments about her lipnd forehead, and she grew still like a tree which has been tossing anuivering and now, when the breeze falls, settles, leaf by leaf, intuiet.
It didn't matter, any of it, she thought. A great man, a great bookame--who could tell? She knew nothing about it. But it was his waith him, his truthfulness--for instance at dinner she had beehinking quite instinctively, If only he would speak! She had completrust in him. And dismissing all this, as one passes in diving now eed, now a straw, now a bubble, she felt again, sinking deeper, as shad felt in the hall when the others were talking, There is something ant--something I have come to get, and she fell deeper and deepeithout knowing quite what it was, with her eyes closed. And shaited a little, knitting, wondering, and slowly rose those words thead said at dinner, "the China rose is all abloom and buzzing with thoney bee," began washing from side to side of her mind rhythmicallynd as they washed, words, like little shaded lights, one red, onlue, one yellow, lit up in the dark of her mind, and seemed leavinheir perches up there to fly across and across, or to cry out and te echoed; so she turned and felt on the table beside her for a book.
And all the lives we ever livend all the lives to bere full of trees and changing leaves,
she murmured, sticking her needles into the stocking. And she openehe book and began reading here and there at random, and as she did sohe felt that she was climbing backwards, upwards, shoving her way under petals that curved over her, so that she only knew this is whiter this is red. She did not know at first what the words meant at all.
Steer, hither steer your winged pines, all beaten Mariners
she read and turned the page, swinging herself, zigzagging this way anhat, from one line to another as from one branch to another, from oned and white flower to another, until a little sound roused her--heusband slapping his thighs. Their eyes met for a second; but they diot want to speak to each other. They had nothing to say, buomething seemed, nevertheless, to go from him to her. It was thife, it was the power of it, it was the tremendous humour, she knewhat made him slap his thighs. Don't interrupt me, he seemed to baying, don't say anything; just sit there. And he went on readingis lips twitched. It filled him. It fortified him. He clean forgoll the little rubs and digs of the evening, and how it bored hinutterably to sit still while people ate and drank interminably, anis being so irritable with his wife and so touchy and minding whehey passed his books over as if they didn't exist at all. But now, helt, it didn't matter a damn who reached Z (if thought ran like alphabet from A to Z). Somebody would reach it--if not he, thenother. This man's strength and sanity, his feeling for straighorward simple things, these fishermen, the poor old crazed creature iucklebackit's cottage made him feel so vigorous, so relieved oomething that he felt roused and triumphant and could not choke bacis tears. Raising the book a little to hide his face, he let theall and shook his head from side to side and forgot himself completelbut not one or two reflections about morality and French novels annglish novels and Scott's hands being tied but his view perhaps beins true as the other view), forgot his own bothers and failureompletely in poor Steenie's drowning and Mucklebackit's sorrow (thaas Scott at his best) and the astonishing delight and feeling oigour that it gave him.
Well, let them improve upon that, he thought as he finished thhapter. He felt that he had been arguing with somebody, and had gohe better of him. They could not improve upon that, whatever theight say; and his own position became more secure. The lovers weriddlesticks, he thought, collecting it all in his mind again. That'iddlesticks, that's first-rate, he thought, putting one thing besidnother. But he must read it again. He could not remember the wholhape of the thing. He had to keep his judgement in suspense. So heturned to the other thought--if young men did not care for thisaturally they did not care for him either. One ought not to complainhought Mr. Ramsay, trying to stifle his desire to complain to his wifhat young men did not admire him. But he was determined; he would noother her again. Here he looked at her reading. She looked vereaceful, reading. He liked to think that every one had takehemselves off and that he and she were alone. The whole of life diot consist in going to bed with a woman, he thought, returning tcott and Balzac, to the English novel and the French novel.
Mrs. Ramsay raised her head and like a person in a light sleep seemed tay that if he wanted her to wake she would, she really would, butherwise, might she go on sleeping, just a little longer, just ittle longer? She was climbing up those branches, this way and thataying hands on one flower and then another.
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
she read, and so reading she was ascending, she felt, on to the topn to the summit. How satisfying! How restful! All the odds and endf the day stuck to this magnet; her mind felt swept, felt clean. Anhen there it was, suddenly entire; she held it in her hands, beautifund reasonable, clear and complete, here--the sonnet.
But she was becoming conscious of her husband looking at her. He wamiling at her, quizzically, as if he were ridiculing her gently foeing asleep in broad daylight, but at the same time he was thinkingo on reading. You don't look sad now, he thought. And he wonderehat she was reading, and exaggerated her ignorance, her simplicityor he liked to think that she was not clever, not book-learned at alle wondered if she understood what she was reading. Probably not, hhought. She was astonishingly beautiful. Her beauty seemed to himf that were possible, to increase
Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you aways with your shadow I with these did play,
she finished.
"Well?" she said, echoing his smile dreamily, looking up from her book.
As with your shadow I with these did play,
she murmured, putting the book on the table.
What had happened, she wondered, as she took up her knitting, since shad seen him alone? She remembered dressing, and seeing the moonndrew holding his plate too high at dinner; being depressed bomething William had said; the birds in the trees; the sofa on thanding; the children being awake; Charles Tansley waking them with hiooks falling--oh, no, that she had invented; and Paul having a washeather case for his watch. Which should she tell him about?
"They're engaged," she said, beginning to knit, "Paul and Minta."
"So I guessed," he said. There was nothing very much to be said about. Her mind was still going up and down, up and down with the poetrye was still feeling very vigorous, very forthright, after readinbout Steenie's funeral. So they sat silent. Then she became awarhat she wanted him to say something.
Anything, anything, she thought, going on with her knitting. Anythinill do.
"How nice it would be to marry a man with a wash-leather bag for hiatch," she said, for that was the sort of joke they had together.
He snorted. He felt about this engagement as he always felt about anngagement; the girl is much too good for that young man. Slowly iame into her head, why is it then that one wants people to marryhat was the value, the meaning of things? (Every word they said noould be true.) Do say something, she thought, wishing only to hear hioice. For the shadow, the thing folding them in was beginning, shelt, to close round her again. Say anything, she begged, looking aim, as if for help.
He was silent, swinging the compass on his watch-chain to and fro, anhinking of Scott's novels and Balzac's novels. But through threpuscular walls of their intimacy, for they were drawing togethernvoluntarily, coming side by side, quite close, she could feel hiind like a raised hand shadowing her mind; and he was beginning, nohat her thoughts took a turn he disliked--towards this "pessimism" ae called it--to fidget, though he said nothing, raising his hand tis forehead, twisting a lock of hair, letting it fall again.
"You won't finish that stocking tonight," he said, pointing to hetocking. That was what she wanted--the asperity in his voiceproving her. If he says it's wrong to be pessimistic probably it irong, she thought; the marriage will turn out all right.
"No," she said, flattening the stocking out upon her knee, "I shan'inish it."
And what then? For she felt that he was still looking at her, but thais look had changed. He wanted something--wanted the thing she alwayound it so difficult to give him; wanted her to tell him that shoved him. And that, no, she could not do. He found talking so mucasier than she did. He could say things--she never could. Saturally it was always he that said the things, and then for someason he would mind this suddenly, and would reproach her. eartless woman he called her; she never told him that she loved himut it was not so--it was not so. It was only that she never could sahat she felt. Was there no crumb on his coat? Nothing she could dor him? Getting up, she stood at the window with the reddish-browtocking in her hands, partly to turn away from him, partly because shemembered how beautiful it often is--the sea at night. But she knehat he had turned his head as she turned; he was watching her. Shnew that he was thinking, You are more beautiful than ever. And shelt herself very beautiful. Will you not tell me just for once thaou love me? He was thinking that, for he was roused, what with Mintnd his book, and its being the end of the day and their havinuarrelled about going to the Lighthouse. But she could not do it; should not say it. Then, knowing that he was watching her, instead oaying anything she turned, holding her stocking, and looked at himnd as she looked at him she began to smile, for though she had noaid a word, he knew, of course he knew, that she loved him. He coulot deny it. And smiling she looked out of the window and saithinking to herself, Nothing on earth can equal this happiness)--
"Yes, you were right. It's going to be wet tomorrow. You won't be ablo go." And she looked at him smiling. For she had triumphed againhe had not said it: yet he knew.
TIME PASSES
1
"Well, we must wait for the future to show," said Mr. Bankes, coming irom the terrace.
"It's almost too dark to see," said Andrew, coming up from the beach.
"One can hardly tell which is the sea and which is the land," sairue.
"Do we leave that light burning?" said Lily as they took their coatff indoors.
"No," said Prue, "not if every one's in."
"Andrew," she called back, "just put out the light in the hall."
One by one the lamps were all extinguished, except that Mr. Carmichaelho liked to lie awake a little reading Virgil, kept his candle burninather longer than the rest.
2
So with the lamps all put out, the moon sunk, and a thin rain drumminn the roof a downpouring of immense darkness began. Nothing, ieemed, could survive the flood, the profusion of darkness whichreeping in at keyholes and crevices, stole round window blinds, camnto bedrooms, swallowed up here a jug and basin, there a bowl of rend yellow dahlias, there the sharp edges and firm bulk of a chest orawers. Not only was furniture confounded; there was scarcelnything left of body or mind by which one could say, "This is he" oThis is she." Sometimes a hand was raised as if to clutch something oard off something, or somebody groaned, or somebody laughed aloud af sharing a joke with nothingness.
Nothing stirred in the drawing-room or in the dining-room or on thtaircase. Only through the rusty hinges and swollen sea-moisteneoodwork certain airs, detached from the body of the wind (the housas ramshackle after all) crept round corners and ventured indoorslmost one might imagine them, as they entered the drawing-roouestioning and wondering, toying with the flap of hanging wall-papersking, would it hang much longer, when would it fall? Then smoothlrushing the walls, they passed on musingly as if asking the red anellow roses on the wall-paper whether they would fade, and questioningently, for there was time at their disposal) the torn letters ihe wastepaper basket, the flowers, the books, all of which were nopen to them and asking, Were they allies? Were they enemies? Hoong would they endure?
So some random light directing them with its pale footfall upon staind mat, from some uncovered star, or wandering ship, or the Lighthousven, with its pale footfall upon stair and mat, the little airounted the staircase and nosed round bedroom doors. But here surelyhey must cease. Whatever else may perish and disappear, what lies hers steadfast. Here one might say to those sliding lights, thosumbling airs that breathe and bend over the bed itself, here you caeither touch nor destroy. Upon which, wearily, ghostlily, as if thead feather-light fingers and the light persistency of feathers, theould look, once, on the shut eyes, and the loosely clasping fingersnd fold their garments wearily and disappear. And so, nosingubbing, they went to the window on the staircase, to the servantsedrooms, to the boxes in the attics; descending, blanched the applen the dining-room table, fumbled the petals of roses, tried thicture on the easel, brushed the mat and blew a little sand along thloor. At length, desisting, all ceased together, gathered togetherll sighed together; all together gave off an aimless gust oamentation to which some door in the kitchen replied; swung widedmitted nothing; and slammed to.
[Here Mr. Carmichael, who was reading Virgil, blew out his candle. Ias past midnight.]
3
But what after all is one night? A short space, especially when tharkness dims so soon, and so soon a bird sings, a cock crows, or aint green quickens, like a turning leaf, in the hollow of the waveight, however, succeeds to night. The winter holds a pack of them itore and deals them equally, evenly, with indefatigable fingershey lengthen; they darken. Some of them hold aloft clear planetslates of brightness. The autumn trees, ravaged as they are, takn the flash of tattered flags kindling in the gloom of cooathedral caves where gold letters on marble pages describe death iattle and how bones bleach and burn far away in Indian sands. Thutumn trees gleam in the yellow moonlight, in the light of harvesoons, the light which mellows the energy of labour, and smooths thtubble, and brings the wave lapping blue to the shore.
It seemed now as if, touched by human penitence and all its toilivine goodness had parted the curtain and displayed behind it, singleistinct, the hare erect; the wave falling; the boat rocking; whichid we deserve them, should be ours always. But alas, divine goodnesswitching the cord, draws the curtain; it does not please him; hovers his treasures in a drench of hail, and so breaks them, sonfuses them that it seems impossible that their calm should eveeturn or that we should ever compose from their fragments a perfechole or read in the littered pieces the clear words of truth. For ouenitence deserves a glimpse only; our toil respite only.
The nights now are full of wind and destruction; the trees plunge anend and their leaves fly helter skelter until the lawn is plastereith them and they lie packed in gutters and choke rain pipes ancatter damp paths. Also the sea tosses itself and breaks itself, anhould any sleeper fancying that he might find on the beach an answeo his doubts, a sharer of his solitude, throw off his bedclothes ano down by himself to walk on the sand, no image with semblance oerving and divine promptitude comes readily to hand bringing the nigho order and making the world reflect the compass of the soul. Thand dwindles in his hand; the voice bellows in his ear. Almost iould appear that it is useless in such confusion to ask the nighhose questions as to what, and why, and wherefore, which tempt thleeper from his bed to seek an answer.
[Mr. Ramsay, stumbling along a passage one dark morning, stretched hirms out, but Mrs. Ramsay having died rather suddenly the night beforeis arms, though stretched out, remained empty.]]
4
So with the house empty and the doors locked and the mattresses rolleound, those stray airs, advance guards of great armies, blustered inrushed bare boards, nibbled and fanned, met nothing in bedroom orawing-room that wholly resisted them but only hangings that flappedood that creaked, the bare legs of tables, saucepans and china alreadurred, tarnished, cracked. What people had shed and left--a pair ohoes, a shooting cap, some faded skirts and coats in wardrobes--thoslone kept the human shape and in the emptiness indicated how once theere filled and animated; how once hands were busy with hooks anuttons; how once the looking-glass had held a face; had held a worlollowed out in which a figure turned, a hand flashed, the door openedn came children rushing and tumbling; and went out again. Now, dafter day, light turned, like a flower reflected in water, its sharmage on the wall opposite. Only the shadows of the trees, flourishinn the wind, made obeisance on the wall, and for a moment darkened thool in which light reflected itself; or birds, flying, made a sofpot flutter slowly across the bedroom floor.
So loveliness reigned and stillness, and together made the shape ooveliness itself, a form from which life had parted; solitary like ool at evening, far distant, seen from a train window, vanishing suickly that the pool, pale in the evening, is scarcely robbed of itolitude, though once seen. Loveliness and stillness clasped hands ihe bedroom, and among the shrouded jugs and sheeted chairs even thrying of the wind, and the soft nose of the clammy sea airs, rubbingnuffling, iterating, and reiterating their questions--"Will you fadeill you perish?"--scarcely disturbed the peace, the indifference, thir of pure integrity, as if the question they asked scarcely needehat they should answer: we remain.
Nothing it seemed could break that image, corrupt that innocence, oisturb the swaying mantle of silence which, week after week, in thmpty room, wove into itself the falling cries of birds, ships hootinghe drone and hum of the fields, a dog's bark, a man's shout, anolded them round the house in silence. Once only a board sprang ohe landing; once in the middle of the night with a roar, with upture, as after centuries of quiescence, a rock rends itself from thountain and hurtles crashing into the valley, one fold of the shawoosened and swung to and fro. Then again peace descended; and thhadow wavered; light bent to its own image in adoration on the bedrooall; and Mrs. McNab, tearing the veil of silence with hands that hatood in the wash-tub, grinding it with boots that had crunched thhingle, came as directed to open all windows, and dust the bedrooms.
5
As she lurched (for she rolled like a ship at sea) and leered (for heyes fell on nothing directly, but with a sidelong glance thaeprecated the scorn and anger of the world--she was witless, she knet), as she clutched the banisters and hauled herself upstairs anolled from room to room, she sang. Rubbing the glass of the lonooking-glass and leering sideways at her swinging figure a sounssued from her lips--something that had been gay twenty years beforn the stage perhaps, had been hummed and danced to, but nowoming from the toothless, bonneted, care-taking woman, was robbef meaning, was like the voice of witlessness, humour, persistenctself, trodden down but springing up again, so that as shurched, dusting, wiping, she seemed to say how it was one long sorrond trouble, how it was getting up and going to bed again, and bringinhings out and putting them away again. It was not easy or snug thiorld she had known for close on seventy years. Bowed down she waith weariness. How long, she asked, creaking and groaning on henees under the bed, dusting the boards, how long shall it endure? buobbled to her feet again, pulled herself up, and again with heidelong leer which slipped and turned aside even from her own facend her own sorrows, stood and gaped in the glass, aimlessly smilingnd began again the old amble and hobble, taking up mats, putting dowhina, looking sideways in the glass, as if, after all, she had heonsolations, as if indeed there twined about her dirge somncorrigible hope. Visions of joy there must have been at the washub, say with her children (yet two had been base-born and one haeserted her), at the public-house, drinking; turning over scraps ier drawers. Some cleavage of the dark there must have been, somhannel in the depths of obscurity through which light enough issued twist her face grinning in the glass and make her, turning to her jogain, mumble out the old music hall song. The mystic, the visionaryalking the beach on a fine night, stirring a puddle, looking at tone, asking themselves "What am I," "What is this?" had suddenly answer vouchsafed them: (they could not say what it was) so that theere warm in the frost and had comfort in the desert. But Mrs. McNaontinued to drink and gossip as before.
6
The Spring without a leaf to toss, bare and bright like a virgin fiercn her chastity, scornful in her purity, was laid out on fields wideyed and watchful and entirely careless of what was done or thought bhe beholders. [Prue Ramsay, leaning on her father's arm, was given iarriage. What, people said, could have been more fitting? And, thedded, how beautiful she looked!]
As summer neared, as the evenings lengthened, there came to thakeful, the hopeful, walking the beach, stirring the poolmaginations of the strangest kind--of flesh turned to atoms whicrove before the wind, of stars flashing in their hearts, of cliffea, cloud, and sky brought purposely together to assemble outwardlhe scattered parts of the vision within. In those mirrors, the mindf men, in those pools of uneasy water, in which clouds for ever turnd shadows form, dreams persisted, and it was impossible to resist thtrange intimation which every gull, flower, tree, man and woman, anhe white earth itself seemed to declare (but if questioned at once tithdraw) that good triumphs, happiness prevails, order rules; or tesist the extraordinary stimulus to range hither and thither in searcf some absolute good, some crystal of intensity, remote from the knowleasures and familiar virtues, something alien to the processes oomestic life, single, hard, bright, like a diamond in the sand, whicould render the possessor secure. Moreover, softened and acquiescenthe spring with her bees humming and gnats dancing threw her cloabout her, veiled her eyes, averted her head, and among passing shadownd flights of small rain seemed to have taken upon her a knowledge ohe sorrows of mankind.
[Prue Ramsay died that summer in some illness connected withildbirth, which was indeed a tragedy, people said, everything, theaid, had promised so well.]
And now in the heat of summer the wind sent its spies about the housgain. Flies wove a web in the sunny rooms; weeds that had grown closo the glass in the night tapped methodically at the window pane. Whearkness fell, the stroke of the Lighthouse, which had laid itself wituch authority upon the carpet in the darkness, tracing its pattername now in the softer light of spring mixed with moonlight glidinently as if it laid its caress and lingered steathily and looked aname lovingly again. But in the very lull of this loving caress, ahe long stroke leant upon the bed, the rock was rent asunder; anotheold of the shawl loosened; there it hung, and swayed. Through thhort summer nights and the long summer days, when the empty roomeemed to murmur with the echoes of the fields and the hum of flieshe long streamer waved gently, swayed aimlessly; while the sun striped and barred the rooms and filled them with yellow haze that MrscNab, when she broke in and lurched about, dusting, sweeping, lookeike a tropical fish oaring its way through sun-lanced waters.
But slumber and sleep though it might there came later in the summeminous sounds like the measured blows of hammers dulled on felthich, with their repeated shocks still further loosened the shawl anracked the tea-cups. Now and again some glass tinkled in the cupboars if a giant voice had shrieked so loud in its agony that tumblertood inside a cupboard vibrated too. Then again silence fell; anhen, night after night, and sometimes in plain mid-day when the roseere bright and light turned on the wall its shape clearly there seemeo drop into this silence, this indifference, this integrity, the thuf something falling.
[A shell exploded. Twenty or thirty young men were blown up in Francemong them Andrew Ramsay, whose death, mercifully, was instantaneous.]
At that season those who had gone down to pace the beach and ask of thea and sky what message they reported or what vision they affirmed hao consider among the usual tokens of divine bounty--the sunset ohe sea, the pallor of dawn, the moon rising, fishing-boats against thoon, and children making mud pies or pelting each other with handfulf grass, something out of harmony with this jocundity and thierenity. There was the silent apparition of an ashen-coloured shior instance, come, gone; there was a purplish stain upon the blanurface of the sea as if something had boiled and bled, invisiblyeneath. This intrusion into a scene calculated to stir the mosublime reflections and lead to the most comfortable conclusions stayeheir pacing. It was difficult blandly to overlook them; to abolisheir significance in the landscape; to continue, as one walked by thea, to marvel how beauty outside mirrored beauty within.
Did Nature supplement what man advanced? Did she complete what hegan? With equal complacence she saw his misery, his meanness, anis torture. That dream, of sharing, completing, of finding iolitude on the beach an answer, was then but a reflection in a mirrornd the mirror itself was but the surface glassiness which forms iuiescence when the nobler powers sleep beneath? Impatient, despairinet loth to go (for beauty offers her lures, has her consolations), tace the beach was impossible; contemplation was unendurable; thirror was broken.
[Mr. Carmichael brought out a volume of poems that spring, which had anexpected success. The war, people said, had revived their interesn poetry.]
7
Night after night, summer and winter, the torment of storms, the arrowike stillness of fine (had there been any one to listen) from thpper rooms of the empty house only gigantic chaos streaked witightning could have been heard tumbling and tossing, as the winds anaves disported themselves like the amorphous bulks of leviathans whosrows are pierced by no light of reason, and mounted one on top onother, and lunged and plunged in the darkness or the daylight (foight and day, month and year ran shapelessly together) in idiot gamesntil it seemed as if the universe were battling and tumbling, in brutonfusion and wanton lust aimlessly by itself.
In spring the garden urns, casually filled with wind-blown plants, weray as ever. Violets came and daffodils. But the stillness and thrightness of the day were as strange as the chaos and tumult of nightith the trees standing there, and the flowers standing there, lookinefore them, looking up, yet beholding nothing, eyeless, and serrible.
8
Thinking no harm, for the family would not come, never again, somaid, and the house would be sold at Michaelmas perhaps, Mrs. McNatooped and picked a bunch of flowers to take home with her. She laihem on the table while she dusted. She was fond of flowers. It was ity to let them waste. Suppose the house were sold (she stood armkimbo in front of the looking-glass) it would want seeing to--iould. There it had stood all these years without a soul in it. Thooks and things were mouldy, for, what with the war and help beinard to get, the house had not been cleaned as she could have wishedt was beyond one person's strength to get it straight now. She waoo old. Her legs pained her. All those books needed to be laid oun the grass in the sun; there was plaster fallen in the hall; thain-pipe had blocked over the study window and let the water inhe carpet was ruined quite. But people should come themselveshey should have sent somebody down to see. For there were clothen the cupboards; they had left clothes in all the bedrooms. Whaas she to do with them? They had the moth in them--Mrs. Ramsay'hings. Poor lady! She would never want THEM again. She was deadhey said; years ago, in London. There was the old grey cloak she worardening (Mrs. McNab fingered it). She could see her, as she came uhe drive with the washing, stooping over her flowers (the garden was itiful sight now, all run to riot, and rabbits scuttling at you out ohe beds)--she could see her with one of the children by her in tharey cloak. There were boots and shoes; and a brush and comb left ohe dressing-table, for all the world as if she expected to come bacomorrow. (She had died very sudden at the end, they said.) And onchey had been coming, but had put off coming, what with the war, anravel being so difficult these days; they had never come all thesears; just sent her money; but never wrote, never came, and expecteo find things as they had left them, ah, dear! Why the dressing-tablrawers were full of things (she pulled them open), handkerchiefs, bitf ribbon. Yes, she could see Mrs. Ramsay as she came up the drive withe washing.
"Good-evening, Mrs. McNab," she would say.
She had a pleasant way with her. The girls all liked her. But, dearany things had changed since then (she shut the drawer); many familiead lost their dearest. So she was dead; and Mr. Andrew killed; aniss Prue dead too, they said, with her first baby; but everyone haost some one these years. Prices had gone up shamefully, and didn'ome down again neither. She could well remember her in her greloak.
"Good-evening, Mrs. McNab," she said, and told cook to keep a plate oilk soup for her--quite thought she wanted it, carrying that heavasket all the way up from town. She could see her now, stooping oveer flowers; and faint and flickering, like a yellow beam or the circlt the end of a telescope, a lady in a grey cloak, stooping over helowers, went wandering over the bedroom wall, up the dressing-tablecross the wash-stand, as Mrs. McNab hobbled and ambled, dustingtraightening. And cook's name now? Mildred? Marian?--some name likhat. Ah, she had forgotten--she did forget things. Fiery, like aled-haired women. Many a laugh they had had. She was always welcomn the kitchen. She made them laugh, she did. Things were better thehan now.
She sighed; there was too much work for one woman. She wagged her heahis side and that. This had been the nursery. Why, it was all damp iere; the plaster was falling. Whatever did they want to hang east's skull there? gone mouldy too. And rats in all the attics. Thain came in. But they never sent; never came. Some of the locks haone, so the doors banged. She didn't like to be up here at dusk aloneither. It was too much for one woman, too much, too much. Shreaked, she moaned. She banged the door. She turned the key in thock, and left the house alone, shut up, locked.
9
The house was left; the house was deserted. It was left like a sheln a sandhill to fill with dry salt grains now that life had left ithe long night seemed to have set in; the trifling airs, nibbling, thlammy breaths, fumbling, seemed to have triumphed. The saucepan hausted and the mat decayed. Toads had nosed their way in. Idlyimlessly, the swaying shawl swung to and fro. A thistle thrust itseletween the tiles in the larder. The swallows nested in the drawingoon; the floor was strewn with straw; the plaster fell in shovelfulsafters were laid bare; rats carried off this and that to gnaw behinhe wainscots. Tortoise-shell butterflies burst from the chrysalis anattered their life out on the window-pane. Poppies sowed themselvemong the dahlias; the lawn waved with long grass; giant artichokeowered among roses; a fringed carnation flowered among the cabbageshile the gentle tapping of a weed at the window had become, ointers' nights, a drumming from sturdy trees and thorned briars whicade the whole room green in summer.
What power could now prevent the fertility, the insensibility oature? Mrs. McNab's dream of a lady, of a child, of a plate of miloup? It had wavered over the walls like a spot of sunlight ananished. She had locked the door; she had gone. It was beyond thtrength of one woman, she said. They never sent. They never wrotehere were things up there rotting in the drawers--it was a shame teave them so, she said. The place was gone to rack and ruin. Onlhe Lighthouse beam entered the rooms for a moment, sent its suddetare over bed and wall in the darkness of winter, looked witquanimity at the thistle and the swallow, the rat and the strawothing now withstood them; nothing said no to them. Let the winlow; let the poppy seed itself and the carnation mate with thabbage. Let the swallow build in the drawing-room, and the thistlhrust aside the tiles, and the butterfly sun itself on the fadehintz of the arm-chairs. Let the broken glass and the china lie oun the lawn and be tangled over with grass and wild berries.
For now had come that moment, that hesitation when dawn trembles anight pauses, when if a feather alight in the scale it will be weigheown. One feather, and the house, sinking, falling, would have turnend pitched downwards to the depths of darkness. In the ruined roomicnickers would have lit their kettles; lovers sought shelter thereying on the bare boards; and the shepherd stored his dinner on thricks, and the tramp slept with his coat round him to ward off thold. Then the roof would have fallen; briars and hemlocks would havlotted out path, step and window; would have grown, unequally buustily over the mound, until some trespasser, losing his way, coulave told only by a red-hot poker among the nettles, or a scrap ohina in the hemlock, that here once some one had lived; there had bee house.
If the feather had fallen, if it had tipped the scale downwards, thhole house would have plunged to the depths to lie upon the sands oblivion. But there was a force working; something not highlonscious; something that leered, something that lurched; something nonspired to go about its work with dignified ritual or solemn chantingrs. McNab groaned; Mrs. Bast creaked. They were old; they were stiffheir legs ached. They came with their brooms and pails at last; theot to work. All of a sudden, would Mrs. McNab see that the house waeady, one of the young ladies wrote: would she get this done; woulhe get that done; all in a hurry. They might be coming for thummer; had left everything to the last; expected to find things ahey had left them. Slowly and painfully, with broom and pailopping, scouring, Mrs. McNab, Mrs. Bast, stayed the corruption and thot; rescued from the pool of Time that was fast closing over them no basin, now a cupboard; fetched up from oblivion all the Waverleovels and a tea-set one morning; in the afternoon restored to sun anir a brass fender and a set of steel fire-irons. George, Mrs. Bast'on, caught the rats, and cut the grass. They had the buildersttended with the creaking of hinges and the screeching of bolts, thlamming and banging of damp-swollen woodwork, some rusty laboriouirth seemed to be taking place, as the women, stooping, risingroaning, singing, slapped and slammed, upstairs now, now down in thellars. Oh, they said, the work!
They drank their tea in the bedroom sometimes, or in the studyreaking off work at mid-day with the smudge on their faces, and theild hands clasped and cramped with the broom handles. Flopped ohairs, they contemplated now the magnificent conquest over taps anath; now the more arduous, more partial triumph over long rows oooks, black as ravens once, now white-stained, breeding pale mushroomnd secreting furtive spiders. Once more, as she felt the tea warm ier, the telescope fitted itself to Mrs. McNab's eyes, and in a ring oight she saw the old gentleman, lean as a rake, wagging his head, ahe came up with the washing, talking to himself, she supposed, on thawn. He never noticed her. Some said he was dead; some said she waead. Which was it? Mrs. Bast didn't know for certain either. Thoung gentleman was dead. That she was sure. She had read his name ihe papers.
There was the cook now, Mildred, Marian, some such name as that--a redeaded woman, quick-tempered like all her sort, but kind, too, if yonew the way with her. Many a laugh they had had together. She saved late of soup for Maggie; a bite of ham, sometimes; whatever was overhey lived well in those days. They had everything they wanteglibly, jovially, with the tea hot in her, she unwound her ball oemories, sitting in the wicker arm-chair by the nursery fender)here was always plenty doing, people in the house, twenty stayinometimes, and washing up till long past midnight.
Mrs. Bast (she had never known them; had lived in Glasgow at that timeondered, putting her cup down, whatever they hung that beast's skulhere for? Shot in foreign parts no doubt.
It might well be, said Mrs. McNab, wantoning on with her memories; thead friends in eastern countries; gentlemen staying there, ladies ivening dress; she had seen them once through the dining-room door alitting at dinner. Twenty she dared say all in their jewellery, anhe asked to stay help wash up, might be till after midnight.
Ah, said Mrs. Bast, they'd find it changed. She leant out of thindow. She watched her son George scything the grass. They mighell ask, what had been done to it? seeing how old Kennedy waupposed to have charge of it, and then his leg got so bad after hell from the cart; and perhaps then no one for a year, or the betteart of one; and then Davie Macdonald, and seeds might be sent, but whhould say if they were ever planted? They'd find it changed.
She watched her son scything. He was a great one for work--one ohose quiet ones. Well they must be getting along with the cupboardshe supposed. They hauled themselves up.
At last, after days of labour within, of cutting and digging withoutusters were flicked from the windows, the windows were shut to, keyere turned all over the house; the front door was banged; it wainished.
And now as if the cleaning and the scrubbing and the scything and thowing had drowned it there rose that half-heard melody, thantermittent music which the ear half catches but lets fall; a bark, leat; irregular, intermittent, yet somehow related; the hum of ansect, the tremor of cut grass, disevered yet somehow belonging; thar of a dorbeetle, the squeak of a wheel, loud, low, but mysteriouslelated; which the ear strains to bring together and is always on therge of harmonising, but they are never quite heard, never fullarmonised, and at last, in the evening, one after another the soundie out, and the harmony falters, and silence falls. With the sunseharpness was lost, and like mist rising, quiet rose, quiet spreadhe wind settled; loosely the world shook itself down to sleep, darklere without a light to it, save what came green suffused througeaves, or pale on the white flowers in the bed by the window.
[Lily Briscoe had her bag carried up to the house late one evening ieptember. Mr. Carmichael came by the same train.]
10
Then indeed peace had come. Messages of peace breathed from the sea the shore. Never to break its sleep any more, to lull it rather moreeply to rest, and whatever the dreamers dreamt holily, dreamt wiselyo confirm--what else was it murmuring--as Lily Briscoe laid her hean the pillow in the clean still room and heard the sea. Through thpen window the voice of the beauty of the world came murmuring, tooftly to hear exactly what it said--but what mattered if the meaninere plain? entreating the sleepers (the house was full again; Mrseckwith was staying there, also Mr. Carmichael), if they would noctually come down to the beach itself at least to lift the blind anook out. They would see then night flowing down in purple; his hearowned; his sceptre jewelled; and how in his eyes a child might looknd if they still faltered (Lily was tired out with travelling anlept almost at once; but Mr. Carmichael read a book by candlelight), ihey still said no, that it was vapour, this splendour of his, and thew had more power than he, and they preferred sleeping; gently theithout complaint, or argument, the voice would sing its song. Gentlhe waves would break (Lily heard them in her sleep); tenderly thight fell (it seemed to come through her eyelids). And it all lookedr. Carmichael thought, shutting his book, falling asleep, much as ised to look.
Indeed the voice might resume, as the curtains of dark wrappehemselves over the house, over Mrs. Beckwith, Mr. Carmichael, and Lilriscoe so that they lay with several folds of blackness on their eyeshy not accept this, be content with this, acquiesce and resign? Thigh of all the seas breaking in measure round the isles soothed themhe night wrapped them; nothing broke their sleep, until, the birdeginning and the dawn weaving their thin voices in to its whiteness, art grinding, a dog somewhere barking, the sun lifted the curtainsroke the veil on their eyes, and Lily Briscoe stirring in her sleephe clutched at her blankets as a faller clutches at the turf on thdge of a cliff. Her eyes opened wide. Here she was again, shhought, sitting bold upright in bed. Awake.
THE LIGHTHOUSE
1
What does it mean then, what can it all mean? Lily Briscoe askeerself, wondering whether, since she had been left alone, it behoveer to go to the kitchen to fetch another cup of coffee or wait herehat does it mean?--a catchword that was, caught up from some bookitting her thought loosely, for she could not, this first morning withe Ramsays, contract her feelings, could only make a phrase resound tover the blankness of her mind until these vapours had shrunk. Foeally, what did she feel, come back after all these years and Mrsamsay dead? Nothing, nothing--nothing that she could express at all.
She had come late last night when it was all mysterious, dark. Now shas awake, at her old place at the breakfast table, but alone. It waery early too, not yet eight. There was this expedition--they weroing to the Lighthouse, Mr. Ramsay, Cam, and James. They should havone already--they had to catch the tide or something. And Cam waot ready and James was not ready and Nancy had forgotten to order thandwiches and Mr. Ramsay had lost his temper and banged out of thoom.
"What's the use of going now?" he had stormed.
Nancy had vanished. There he was, marching up and down the terrace i rage. One seemed to hear doors slamming and voices calling all ovehe house. Now Nancy burst in, and asked, looking round the room, in ueer half dazed, half desperate way, "What does one send to thighthouse?" as if she were forcing herself to do what she despaired over being able to do.
What does one send to the Lighthouse indeed! At any other time Lilould have suggested reasonably tea, tobacco, newspapers. But thiorning everything seemed so extraordinarily queer that a question likancy's--What does one send to the Lighthouse?--opened doors in one'ind that went banging and swinging to and fro and made one keesking, in a stupefied gape, What does one send? What does one dohy is one sitting here, after all?
Sitting alone (for Nancy went out again) among the clean cups at thong table, she felt cut off from other people, and able only to go oatching, asking, wondering. The house, the place, the morning, aleemed strangers to her. She had no attachment here, she felt, nelations with it, anything might happen, and whatever did happen, tep outside, a voice calling ("It's not in the cupboard; it's on thanding," some one cried), was a question, as if the link that usuallound things together had been cut, and they floated up here, dowhere, off, anyhow. How aimless it was,, how chaotic, how unreal ias, she thought, looking at her empty coffee cup. Mrs. Ramsay deadndrew killed; Prue dead too--repeat it as she might, it roused neeling in her. And we all get together in a house like this on orning like this, she said, looking out of the window. It was eautiful still day.
2
Suddenly Mr. Ramsay raised his head as he passed and looked straight aer, with his distraught wild gaze which was yet so penetrating, as ie saw you, for one second, for the first time, for ever; and shretended to drink out of her empty coffee cup so as to escape him--tscape his demand on her, to put aside a moment longer that imperioueed. And he shook his head at her, and strode on ("Alone" she hearim say, "Perished" she heard him say) and like everything else thitrange morning the words became symbols, wrote themselves all over threy-green walls. If only she could put them together, she felt, writhem out in some sentence, then she would have got at the truth ohings. Old Mr. Carmichael came padding softly in, fetched his coffeeook his cup and made off to sit in the sun. The extraordinarnreality was frightening; but it was also exciting. Going to thighthouse. But what does one send to the Lighthouse? Perished. Alonehe grey-green light on the wall opposite. The empty places. Such werome of the parts, but how bring them together? she asked. As if annterruption would break the frail shape she was building on the tablhe turned her back to the window lest Mr. Ramsay should see her. Shust escape somewhere, be alone somewhere. Suddenly she rememberedhen she had sat there last ten years ago there had been a little sprir leaf pattern on the table-cloth, which she had looked at in a momenf revelation. There had been a problem about a foreground of icture. Move the tree to the middle, she had said. She had neveinished that picture. She would paint that picture now. It had beenocking about in her mind all these years. Where were her paints, shondered? Her paints, yes. She had left them in the hall last nighthe would start at once. She got up quickly, before Mr. Ramsay turned.
She fetched herself a chair. She pitched her easel with her precisld-maidish movements on the edge of the lawn, not too close to Mrarmichael, but close enough for his protection. Yes, it must haveen precisely here that she had stood ten years ago. There was thall; the hedge; the tree. The question was of some relation betweehose masses. She had borne it in her mind all these years. It seemes if the solution had come to her: she knew now what she wanted to do.
But with Mr. Ramsay bearing down on her, she could do nothing. Everime he approached--he was walking up and down the terrace--ruipproached, chaos approached. She could not paint. She stooped, shurned; she took up this rag; she squeezed that tube. But all she dias to ward him off a moment. He made it impossible for her to dnything. For if she gave him the least chance, if he saw heisengaged a moment, looking his way a moment, he would be on heraying, as he had said last night, "You find us much changed." Lasight he had got up and stopped before her, and said that. Dumb antaring though they had all sat, the six children whom they used tall after the Kings and Queens of England--the Red, the Fair, thicked, the Ruthless--she felt how they raged under it. Kind old Mrseckwith said something sensible. But it was a house full of unrelateassions--she had felt that all the evening. And on top of this chaor. Ramsay got up, pressed her hand, and said: "You will find us muchanged" and none of them had moved or had spoken; but had sat there af they were forced to let him say it. Only James (certainly thullen) scowled at the lamp; and Cam screwed her handkerchief round heinger. Then he reminded them that they were going to the Lighthousomorrow. They must be ready, in the hall, on the stroke of half-paseven. Then, with his hand on the door, he stopped; he turned upohem. Did they not want to go? he demanded. Had they dared sao (he had some reason for wanting it) he would have flung himselragically backwards into the bitter waters of depair. Such ift he had for gesture. He looked like a king in exile. Doggedlames said yes. Cam stumbled more wretchedly. Yes, oh, yes, they'oth be ready, they said. And it struck her, this was tragedy--noalls, dust, and the shroud; but children coerced, their spiritubdued. James was sixteen, Cam, seventeen, perhaps. She had lookeound for some one who was not there, for Mrs. Ramsay, presumably. Buhere was only kind Mrs. Beckwith turning over her sketches under thamp. Then, being tired, her mind still rising and falling with thea, the taste and smell that places have after long absence possessiner, the candles wavering in her eyes, she had lost herself and gonnder. It was a wonderful night, starlit; the waves sounded as theent upstairs; the moon surprised them, enormous, pale, as they passehe staircase window. She had slept at once.
She set her clean canvas firmly upon the easel, as a barrier, frailut she hoped sufficiently substantial to ward off Mr. Ramsay and hixactingness. She did her best to look, when his back was turned, aer picture; that line there, that mass there. But it was out of thuestion. Let him be fifty feet away, let him not even speak to youet him not even see you, he permeated, he prevailed, he imposeimself. He changed everything. She could not see the colour; should not see the lines; even with his back turned to her, she coulnly think, But he'll be down on me in a moment, demanding--somethinhe felt she could not give him. She rejected one brush; she chosnother. When would those children come? When would they all be offhe fidgeted. That man, she thought, her anger rising in her, neveave; that man took. She, on the other hand, would be forced to givers. Ramsay had given. Giving, giving, giving, she had died--and haeft all this. Really, she was angry with Mrs. Ramsay. With the bruslightly trembling in her fingers she looked at the hedge, the stephe wall. It was all Mrs. Ramsay's doing. She was dead. Here was Lilyt forty-four, wasting her time, unable to do a thing, standing therelaying at painting, playing at the one thing one did not play at, ant was all Mrs. Ramsay's fault. She was dead. The step where she useo sit was empty. She was dead.
But why repeat this over and over again? Why be always trying to brinp some feeling she had not got? There was a kind of blasphemy in itt was all dry: all withered: all spent. They ought not to have askeer; she ought not to have come. One can't waste one's time at fortyour, she thought. She hated playing at painting. A brush, the onependable thing in a world of strife, ruin, chaos--that one should nolay with, knowingly even: she detested it. But he made her. Yohan't touch your canvas, he seemed to say, bearing down on her, tilou've given me what I want of you. Here he was, close upon her againreedy, distraught. Well, thought Lily in despair, letting her righand fall at her side, it would be simpler then to have it overurely, she could imitate from recollection the glow, the rhapsody, thelf-surrender, she had seen on so many women's faces (on Mrs. Ramsay'sor instance) when on some occasion like this they blazed up--she coulemember the look on Mrs. Ramsay's face--into a rapture of sympathy, oelight in the reward they had, which, though the reason of it escapeer, evidently conferred on them the most supreme bliss of which humaature was capable. Here he was, stopped by her side. She would givim what she could.
3
She seemed to have shrivelled slightly, he thought. She looked a littlkimpy, wispy; but not unattractive. He liked her. There had been somalk of her marrying William Bankes once, but nothing had come of itis wife had been fond of her. He had been a little out of temper tot breakfast. And then, and then--this was one of those moments when enormous need urged him, without being conscious what it was, tpproach any woman, to force them, he did not care how, his need was sreat, to give him what he wanted: sympathy.
Was anybody looking after her? he said. Had she everything shanted?
"Oh, thanks, everything," said Lily Briscoe nervously. No; she coulot do it. She ought to have floated off instantly upon some wave oympathetic expansion: the pressure on her was tremendous. But shemained stuck. There was an awful pause. They both looked at thea. Why, thought Mr. Ramsay, should she look at the sea when I aere? She hoped it would be calm enough for them to land at thighthouse, she said. The Lighthouse! The Lighthouse! What's thaot to do with it? he thought impatiently. Instantly, with the forcf some primeval gust (for really he could not restrain himself anonger), there issued from him such a groan that any other woman in thhole world would have done something, said something--all excepyself, thought Lily, girding at herself bitterly, who am not a womanut a peevish, ill-tempered, dried-up old maid, presumably.
[Mr. Ramsay sighed to the full. He waited. Was she not going to sanything? Did she not see what he wanted from her? Then he said had a particular reason for wanting to go to the Lighthouse. Hiife used to send the men things. There was a poor boy with uberculous hip, the lightkeeper's son. He sighed profoundlye sighed significantly. All Lily wished was that this enormous floof grief, this insatiable hunger for sympathy, this demand that shhould surrender herself up to him entirely, and even so he had sorrownough to keep her supplied for ever, should leave her, should biverted (she kept looking at the house, hoping for an interruptionefore it swept her down in its flow.
"Such expeditions," said Mr. Ramsay, scraping the ground with his toeare very painful." Still Lily said nothing. (She is a stock, she is tone, he said to himself.) "They are very exhausting," he saidooking, with a sickly look that nauseated her (he was acting, shelt, this great man was dramatising himself), at his beautiful handst was horrible, it was indecent. Would they never come, she askedor she could not sustain this enormous weight of sorrow, support theseavy draperies of grief (he had assumed a pose of extremecreptitude; he even tottered a little as he stood there) a momenonger.
Still she could say nothing; the whole horizon seemed swept bare objects to talk about; could only feel, amazedly, as Mr. Ramsay stoohere, how his gaze seemed to fall dolefully over the sunny grass aniscolour it, and cast over the rubicund, drowsy, entirely contenteigure of Mr. Carmichael, reading a French novel on a deck-chair, a veif crape, as if such an existence, flaunting its prosperity in a worlf woe, were enough to provoke the most dismal thoughts of all. Loot him, he seemed to be saying, look at me; and indeed, all the time has feeling, Think of me, think of me. Ah, could that bulk only bafted alongside of them, Lily wished; had she only pitched her easel ard or two closer to him; a man, any man, would staunch this effusionould stop these lamentations. A woman, she had provoked this horror woman, she should have known how to deal with it. It was immenselo her discredit, sexually, to stand there dumb. One said--what dine say?--Oh, Mr. Ramsay! Dear Mr. Ramsay! That was what that kind olady who sketched, Mrs. Beckwith, would have said instantly, anightly. But, no. They stood there, isolated from the rest of thorld. His immense self-pity, his demand for sympathy poured anpread itself in pools at ther feet, and all she did, miserable sinnehat she was, was to draw her skirts a little closer round her anklesest she should get wet. In complete silence she stood there, graspiner paint brush.
Heaven could never be sufficiently praised! She heard sounds in thouse. James and Cam must be coming. But Mr. Ramsay, as if he knehat his time ran short, exerted upon her solitary figure the immensressure of his concentrated woe; his age; his frailty: his desolationhen suddenly, tossing his head impatiently, in his annoyance--fofter all, what woman could resist him?--he noticed that his boot-laceere untied. Remarkable boots they were too, Lily thought, lookinown at them: sculptured; colossal; like everything that Mr. Ramsaore, from his frayed tie to his half-buttoned waistcoat, his owndisputably. She could see them walking to his room of their owccord, expressive in his absence of pathos, surliness, ill-temperharm.
"What beautiful boots!" she exclaimed. She was ashamed of herself. Traise his boots when he asked her to solace his soul; when he hahown her his bleeding hands, his lacerated heart, and asked her tity them, then to say, cheerfully, "Ah, but what beautiful boots yoear!" deserved, she knew, and she looked up expecting to get it in onf his sudden roars of ill-temper complete annihilation.
Instead, Mr. Ramsay smiled. His pall, his draperies, his infirmitieell from him. Ah, yes, he said, holding his foot up for her to loot, they were first-rate boots. There was only one man in England whould make boots like that. Boots are among the chief curses oankind, he said. "Bootmakers make it their business," he exclaimedto cripple and torture the human foot." They are also the mosbstinate and perverse of mankind. It had taken him the best part ois youth to get boots made as they should be made. He would have hebserve (he lifted his right foot and then his left) that she had neveeen boots made quite that shape before. They were made of the fineseather in the world, also. Most leather was mere brown paper anardboard. He looked complacently at his foot, still held in the airhey had reached, she felt, a sunny island where peace dwelt, saniteigned and the sun for ever shone, the blessed island of good bootser heart warmed to him. "Now let me see if you can tie a knot," haid. He poohpoohed her feeble system. He showed her his ownvention. Once you tied it, it never came undone. Three times hnotted her shoe; three times he unknotted it.
Why, at this completely inappropriate moment, when he was stooping oveer shoe, should she be so tormented with sympathy for him that, as shtooped too, the blood rushed to her face, and, thinking of heallousness (she had called him a play-actor) she felt her eyes swelnd tingle with tears? Thus occupied he seemed to her a figure onfinite pathos. He tied knots. He bought boots. There was no helpinr. Ramsay on the journey he was going. But now just as she wished tay something, could have said something, perhaps, here they were--Cand James. They appeared on the terrace. They came, lagging, side bide, a serious, melancholy couple.
But why was it like THAT that they came? She could not help feelinnnoyed with them; they might have come more cheerfully; they mighave given him what, now that they were off, she would not have thhance of giving him. For she felt a sudden emptiness; a frustrationer feeling had come too late; there it was ready; but he no longeeeded it. He had become a very distinguished, elderly man, who had need of her whatsoever. She felt snubbed. He slung a knapsack rounis shoulders. He shared out the parcels--there were a number of themll tied in brown paper. He sent Cam for a cloak. He had all thppearance of a leader making ready for an expedition. Then, wheelinbout, he led the way with his firm military tread, in those wonderfuoots, carrying brown paper parcels, down the path, his childreollowing him. They looked, she thought, as if fate had devoted theo some stern enterprise, and they went to it, still young enough to brawn acquiescent in their father's wake, obediently, but with a pallon their eyes which made her feel that they suffered something beyonheir years in silence. So they passed the edge of the lawn, and ieemed to Lily that she watched a procession go, drawn on by somtress of common feeling which made it, faltering and flagging as ias, a little company bound together and strangely impressive to herolitely, but very distantly, Mr. Ramsay raised his hand and saluted hes they passed.
But what a face, she thought, immediately finding the sympathy whiche had not been asked to give troubling her for expression. What haade it like that? Thinking, night after night, she supposed--abouhe reality of kitchen tables, she added, remembering the symbol whicn her vagueness as to what Mr. Ramsay did think about Andrew had giveer. (He had been killed by the splinter of a shell instantly, shethought her.) The kitchen table was something visionary, austereomething bare, hard, not ornamental. There was no colour to it; ias all edges and angles; it was uncompromisingly plain. But Mr. Ramsaept always his eyes fixed upon it, never allowed himself to bistracted or deluded, until his face became worn too and ascetic anartook of this unornamented beauty which so deeply impressed herhen, she recalled (standing where he had left her, holding her brush)orries had fretted it--not so nobly. He must have had his doubtbout that table, she supposed; whether the table was a real tablehether it was worth the time he gave to it; whether he was able aftell to find it. He had had doubts, she felt, or he would have askeess of people. That was what they talked about late at nighometimes, she suspected; and then next day Mrs. Ramsay looked tirednd Lily flew into a rage with him over some absurd little thing. Buow he had nobody to talk to about that table, or his boots, or hinots; and he was like a lion seeking whom he could devour, and hiace had that touch of desperation, of exaggeration in it which alarmeer, and made her pull her skirts about her. And then, she recalledhere was that sudden revivification, that sudden flare (when shraised his boots), that sudden recovery of vitality and interest irdinary human things, which too passed and changed (for he was alwayhanging, and hid nothing) into that other final phase which was new ter and had, she owned, made herself ashamed of her own irritabilityhen it seemed as if he had shed worries and ambitions, and the hope oympathy and the desire for praise, had entered some other region, warawn on, as if by curiosity, in dumb colloquy, whether with himself onother, at the head of that little procession out of one's range. Axtraordinary face! The gate banged.
4
So they're gone, she thought, sighing with relief and disappointmenter sympathy seemed to be cast back on her, like a bramble spruncross her face. She felt curiously divided, as if one part of heere drawn out there--it was a still day, hazy; the Lighthouse lookehis morning at an immense distance; the other had fixed itseloggedly, solidly, here on the lawn. She saw her canvas as if it haloated up and placed itself white and uncompromising directly beforer. It seemed to rebuke her with its cold stare for all this hurrnd agitation; this folly and waste of emotion; it drastically recalleer and spread through her mind first a peace, as her disorderlensations (he had gone and she had been so sorry for him and she haaid nothing) trooped off the field; and then, emptiness. She lookelankly at the canvas, with its uncompromising white stare; from thanvas to the garden. There was something (she stood screwing up heittle Chinese eyes in her small puckered face), something shemembered in the relations of those lines cutting across, slicinown, and in the mass of the hedge with its green cave of blues anrowns, which had stayed in her mind; which had tied a knot in her mino that at odds and ends of time, involuntarily, as she walked alonhe Brompton Road, as she brushed her hair, she found herself paintinhat picture, passing her eye over it, and untying the knot imagination. But there was all the difference in the world betweehis planning airily away from the canvas and actually taking her brusnd making the first mark.
She had taken the wrong brush in her agitation at Mr. Ramsay's presencend her easel, rammed into the earth so nervously, was at the wronngle. And now that she had ut that right, and in so doing had subduehe impertinences and irrelevances that plucked her attention and mader remember how she was such and such a person, had such and sucelations to people, she took her hand and raised her brush. For oment it stayed trembling in a painful but exciting ecstasy in thir. Where to begin?--that was the question at what point to makhe first mark? One line placed on the canvas committed her tnnumerable risks, to frequent and irrevocable decisions. All that idea seemed simple became in practice immediately complex; as the wavehape themselves symmetrically from the cliff top, but to the swimmemong them are divided by steep gulfs, and foaming crests. Still thisk must be run; the mark made.
With a curious physical sensation, as if she were urged forward and ahe same time must hold herself back, she made her first quick decisivtroke. The brush descended. It flickered brown over the white canvast left a running mark. A second time she did it--a third time. Ano pausing and so flickering, she attained a dancing rhythmicaovement, as if the pauses were one part of the rhythm and the strokenother, and all were related; and so, lightly and swiftly pausingtriking, she scored her canvas with brown running nervous lines whicad no sooner settled there than they enclosed ( she felt it loominut at her) a space. Down in the hollow of one wave she saw the nexave towering higher and higher above her. For what could be morormidable than that space? Here she was again, she thought, steppinack to look at it, drawn out of gossip, out of living, out oommunity with people into the presence of this formidable anciennemy of hers--this other thing, this truth, this reality, whicuddenly laid hands on her, emerged stark at the back of appearancend commanded her attention. She was half unwilling, half reluctanthy always be drawn out and haled away? Why not left in peace, talk to Mr. Carmichael on the lawn? It was an exacting form ontercourse anyhow. Other worshipful objects were content witorship; men, women, God, all let one kneel prostrate; but thiorm, were it only the shape of a white lamp-shade looming on icker table, roused one to perpetual combat, challenged one to a fighn which one was bound to be worsted. Always (it was in her nature, on her sex, she did not know which) before she exchanged the fluiditf life for the concentration of painting she had a few moments oakedness when she seemed like an unborn soul, a soul reft of bodyesitating on some windy pinnacle and exposed without protection to alhe blasts of doubt. Why then did she do it? She looked at thanvas, lightly scored with running lines. It would be hung in thervants' bedrooms. It would be rolled up and stuffed under a sofahat was the good of doing it then, and she heard some voice saying shouldn't paint, saying she couldn't create, as if she were caught up ine of those habitual currents in which after a certain time experiencorms in the mind, so that one repeats words without being aware anonger who originally spoke them.
Can't paint, can't write, she murmured monotonously, anxiouslonsidering what her plan of attack should be. For the mass loomeefore her; it protruded; she felt it pressing on her eyeballs. Thens if some juice necessary for the lubrication of her faculties werpontaneously squirted, she began precariously dipping among the bluend umbers, moving her brush hither and thither, but it was now heaviend went slower, as if it had fallen in with some rhythm which waictated to her (she kept looking at the hedge, at the canvas) by whahe rhythm was strong enough to bear her along with it on its currentertainly she was losing consciousness of outer things. And as shost consciousness of outer things, and her name and her personalitnd her appearance, and whether Mr. Carmichael was there or not, heind kept throwing up from its depths, scenes, and names, and sayingsnd memories and ideas, like a fountain spurting over that glaringideously difficult white space, while she modelled it with greens anlues.
Charles Tansley used to say that, she remembered, women can't paintan't write. Coming up behind her, he had stood close beside her, hing she hated, as she painted her on this very spot. "Shag tobacco,e said, "fivepence an ounce," parading his poverty, his principlesBut the war had drawn the sting of her femininity. Poor devils, onhought, poor devils, of both sexes.) He was always carrying a boobout under his arm--a purple book. He "worked." He sat, shemembered, working in a blaze of sun. At dinner he would sit right ihe middle of the view. But after all, she reflected, there was thcene on the beach. One must remember that. It was a windy morninghey had all gone down to the beach. Mrs. Ramsay sat down and wrotetters by a rock. She wrote and wrote. "Oh," she said, looking up aomething floating in the sea, "is it a lobster pot? Is it an upturneoat?" She was so short-sighted that she could not see, and theharles Tansley became as nice as he could possibly be. He begalaying ducks and drakes. They chose little flat black stones and senhem skipping over the waves. Every now and then Mrs. Ramsay looked uver her spectacles and laughed at them. What they said she could noemember, but only she and Charles throwing stones and getting on verell all of a sudden and Mrs. Ramsay watching them. She was highlonscious of that. Mrs. Ramsay, she thought, stepping back and screwinp her eyes. (It must have altered the design a good deal when she waitting on the step with James. There must have been a shadow.) Whehe thought of herself and Charles throwing ducks and drakes and of thhole scene on the beach, it seemed to depend somehow upon Mrs. Ramsaitting under the rock, with a pad on her knee, writing letters. (Shrote innumerable letters, and sometimes the wind took them and she anharles just saved a page from the sea.) But what a power was in thuman soul! she thought. That woman sitting there writing under thock resolved everything into simplicity; made these angersrritations fall off like old rags; she brought together this and thand then this, and so made out of that miserable silliness and spitshe and Charles squabbling, sparring, had been silly and spitefulomething--this scene on the beach for example, this moment oriendship and liking--which survived, after all these years completeo that she dipped into it to re-fashion her memory of him, and thert stayed in the mind affecting one almost like a work of art.
"Like a work of art," she repeated, looking from her canvas to thrawing-room steps and back again. She must rest for a moment. Andesting, looking from one to the other vaguely, the old question whicraversed the sky of the soul perpetually, the vast, the generauestion which was apt to particularise itself at such moments ahese, when she released faculties that had been on the strain, stoover her, paused over her, darkened over her. What is the meaning oife? That was all--a simple question; one that tended to close in one with years. The great revelation had never come. The greaevelation perhaps never did come. Instead there were little dailiracles, illuminations, matches struck unexpectedly in the darkere was one. This, that, and the other; herself and Charles Tanslend the breaking wave; Mrs. Ramsay bringing them together; Mrs. Ramsaaying, "Life stand still here"; Mrs. Ramsay making of the momenomething permanent (as in another sphere Lily herself tried take of the moment something permanent)--this was of the naturf a revelation. In the midst of chaos there was shape; this eternaassing and flowing (she looked at the clouds going and the leavehaking) was struck into stability. Life stand still here, Mrs. Ramsaaid. "Mrs. Ramsay! Mrs. Ramsay!" she repeated. She owed it all to her.
All was silence. Nobody seemed yet to be stirring in the house. Shooked at it there sleeping in the early sunlight with its windowreen and blue with the reflected leaves. The faint thought she wahinking of Mrs. Ramsay seemed in consonance with this quiet house; thimoke; this fine early morning air. Faint and unreal, it was amazinglure and exciting. She hoped nobody would open the window or come ouf the house, but that she might be left alone to go on thinking, to gn painting. She turned to her canvas. But impelled by some curiosityriven by the discomfort of the sympathy which she held undischargedhe walked a pace or so to the end of the lawn to see whether, dowhere on the beach, she could see that little company setting sailown there among the little boats which floated, some with their sailurled, some slowly, for it was very calm moving away, there was onather apart from the others. The sail was even now being hoistedhe decided that there in that very distant and entirely silent littloat Mr. Ramsay was sitting with Cam and James. Now they had got thail up; now after a little flagging and silence, she watched the boaake its way with deliberation past the other boats out to sea.
5
The sails flapped over their heads. The water chuckled and slapped thides of the boat, which drowsed motionless in the sun. Now and thehe sails rippled with a little breeze in them, but the ripple ran ovehem and ceased. The boat made no motion at all. Mr. Ramsay sat in thiddle of the boat. He would be impatient in a moment, James thoughtnd Cam thought, looking at her father, who sat in the middle of thoat between them (James steered; Cam sat alone in the bow) with hiegs tightly curled. He hated hanging about. Sure enough, afteidgeting a second or two, he said something sharp to Macalister's boyho got out his oars and began to row. But their father, they knewould never be content until they were flying along. He would keeooking for a breeze, fidgeting, saying things under his breath, whicacalister and and Macalister's boy would overhear, and they would bote made horribly uncomfortable. He had made them come. He had forcehem to come. In their anger they hoped that the breeze would neveise, that he might be thwarted in every possible way, since he haorced them to come against their wills.
All the way down to the beach they had lagged behind together, thouge bade them "Walk up, walk up," without speaking. Their heads werent down, their heads were pressed down by some remorseless galepeak to him they could not. They must come; they must follow. Theust walk behind him carrying brown paper parcels. But they vowed, iilence, as they walked, to stand by each other and carry out the greaompact--to resist tyranny to the death. So there they would sit, ont one end of the boat, one at the other, in silence. They would saothing, only look at him now and then where he sat with his legwisted, frowning and fidgeting, and pishing and pshawing and mutterinhings to himself, and waiting impatiently for a breeze. And theoped it would be calm. They hoped he would be thwarted. They hopehe whole expedition would fail, and they would have to put back, witheir parcels, to the beach.
But now, when Macalister's boy had rowed a little way out, the saillowly swung round, the boat quickened itself, flattened itself, anhot off. Instantly, as if some great strain had been relieved, Mramsay uncurled his legs, took out his tobacco pouch, handed it with ittle grunt to Macalister, and felt, they knew, for all they sufferederfectly content. Now they would sail on for hours like this, and Mramsay would ask old Macalister a question--about the great storast winter probably--and old Macalister would answer it, and theould puff their pipes together, and Macalister would take a tarry ropn his fingers, tying or untying some knot, and the boy would fish, anever say a word to any one. James would be forced to keep his eye alhe time on the sail. For if he forgot, then the sail puckered anhivered, and the boat slackened, and Mr. Ramsay would say sharplyLook out! Look out!" and old Macalister would turn slowly on hieat. So they heard Mr. Ramsay asking some question about the greatorm at Christmas. "She comes driving round the point," olacalister said, describing the great storm last Christmas, when tehips had been driven into the bay for shelter, and he had seen "onhere, one there, one there" (he pointed slowly round the bay. Mramsay followed him, turning his head). He had seen four men clingino the mast. Then she was gone. "And at last we shoved her off," hent on (but in their anger and their silence they only caught a worere and there, sitting at opposite ends of the boat, united by theiompact to fight tyranny to the death). At last they had shoveer off, they had launched the lifeboat, and they had got her ouast the point--Macalister told the story; and though they onlaught a word here and there, they were conscious all the time of theiather--how he leant forward, how he brought his voice into tune witacalister's voice; how, puffing at his pipe, and looking there anhere where Macalister pointed, he relished the thought of the stornd the dark night and the fishermen striving there. He liked that mehould labour and sweat on the windy beach at night; pitting muscle anrain against the waves and the wind; he liked men to work like thatnd women to keep house, and sit beside sleeping children indoorshile men were drowned, out there in a storm. So James could tell, sam could tell (they looked at him, they looked at each other), frois toss and his vigilance and the ring in his voice, and the littlinge of Scottish accent which came into his voice, making him seeike a peasant himself, as he questioned Macalister about the elevehips that had been driven into the bay in a storm. Three had sunk.
He looked proudly where Macalister pointed; and Cam thought, feelinroud of him without knowing quite why, had he been there he would havaunched the lifeboat, he would have reached the wreck, Cam thoughte was so brave, he was so adventurous, Cam thought. But shemembered. There was the compact; to resist tyranny to the deathheir grievance weighed them down. They had been forced; they had beeidden. He had borne them down once more with his gloom and hiuthority, making them do his bidding, on this fine morning, comeecause he wished it, carrying these parcels, to the Lighthouse; takart in these rites he went through for his own pleasure in memory oead people, which they hated, so that they lagged after him, alhe pleasure of the day was spoilt.
Yes, the breeze was freshening. The boat was leaning, the water waliced sharply and fell away in green cascades, in bubbles, iataracts. Cam looked down into the foam, into the sea with all itreasure in it, and its speed hypnotised her, and the tie between hend James sagged a little. It slackened a little. She began to thinkow fast it goes. Where are we going? and the movement hypnotised herhile James, with his eye fixed on the sail and on the horizon, steererimly. But he began to think as he steered that he might escape; hight be quit of it all. They might land somewhere; and be free thenoth of them, looking at each other for a moment, had a sense of escapnd exaltation, what with the speed and the change. But the breezred in Mr. Ramsay too the same excitement, and, as old Macalisteurned to fling his line overboard, he cried out aloud,
"We perished," and then again, "each alone." And then with his usuapasm of repentance or shyness, pulled himself up, and waved his hanowards the shore.
"See the little house," he said pointing, wishing Cam to look. Shaised herself reluctantly and looked. But which was it? She could nonger make out, there on the hillside, which was their house. Alooked distant and peaceful and strange. The shore seemed refined, faway, unreal. Already the little distance they had sailed had put thear from it and given it the changed look, the composed look, oomething receding in which one has no longer any part. Which waheir house? She could not see it.
"But I beneath a rougher sea," Mr. Ramsay murmured. He had found thouse and so seeing it, he had also seen himself there; he had seeimself walking on the terrace, alone. He was walking up and dowetween the urns; and he seemed to himself very old and bowed. Sittinn the boat, he bowed, he crouched himself, acting instantly his part-he part of a desolate man, widowed, bereft; and so called up beforim in hosts people sympathising with him; staged for himself as he san the boat, a little drama; which required of him decrepitude anxhaustion and sorrow (he raised his hands and looked at the thinnesf them, to confirm his dream) and then there was given him ibundance women's sympathy, and he imagined how they would soothe hind sympathise with him, and so getting in his dream some reflection ohe exquisite pleasure women's sympathy was to him, he sighed and saiently and mournfully:
But I beneath a rougher seas whelmed in deeper gulfs than he,
so that the mournful words were heard quite clearly by them all. Caalf started on her seat. It shocked her--it outraged her. Thovement roused her father; and he shuddered, and broke offxclaiming: "Look! Look!" so urgently that James also turned his heao look over his shoulder at the island. They all looked. They looket the island.
But Cam could see nothing. She was thinking how all those paths anhe lawn, thick and knotted with the lives they had lived there, werone: were rubbed out; were past; were unreal, and now this was realhe boat and the sail with its patch; Macalister with his earrings; thoise of the waves--all this was real. Thinking this, she waurmuring to herself, "We perished, each alone," for her father's wordroke and broke again in her mind, when her father, seeing her gazino vaguely, began to tease her. Didn't she know the points of thompass? he asked. Didn't she know the North from the South? Did sheally think they lived right out there? And he pointed again, anhowed her where their house was, there, by those trees. He wished should try to be more accurate, he said: "Tell me--which is East, whics West?" he said, half laughing at her, half scolding her, for hould not understand the state of mind of any one, not absolutelmbecile, who did not know the points of the compass. Yet she did nonow. And seeing her gazing, with her vague, now rather frightenedyes fixed where no house was Mr. Ramsay forgot his dream; how he walkep and down between the urns on the terrace; how the arms wertretched out to him. He thought, women are always like that; thagueness of their minds is hopeless; it was a thing he had never beeble to understand; but so it was. It had been so with her--his wifehey could not keep anything clearly fixed in their minds. But he haeen wrong to be angry with her; moreover, did he not rather like thiagueness in women? It was part of their extraordinary charm. I wilake her smile at me, he thought. She looks frightened. She was silent. He clutched his fingers, and determined that his voice and hiace and all the quick expressive gestures which had been at hiommand making people pity him and praise him all these years shoulubdue themselves. He would make her smile at him. He would find somimple easy thing to say to her. But what? For, wrapped up in hiork as he was, he forgot the sort of thing one said. There was uppy. They had a puppy. Who was looking after the puppy today? hsked. Yes, thought James pitilessly, seeing his sister's head againshe sail, now she will give way. I shall be left to fight the tyranlone. The compact would be left to him to carry out. Cam would neveesist tyranny to the death, he thought grimly, watching her face, sadulky, yielding. And as sometimes happens when a cloud falls on reen hillside and gravity descends and there among all the surroundinills is gloom and sorrow, and it seems as if the hills themselveust ponder the fate of the clouded, the darkened, either in pityr maliciously rejoicing in her dismay: so Cam now felt herselvercast, as she sat there among calm, resolute people and wondereow to answer her father about the puppy; how to resist hintreaty--forgive me, care for me; while James the lawgiver, with thablets of eternal wisdom laid open on his knee (his hand on the tillead become symbolical to her), said, Resist him. Fight him. He saio rightly; justly. For they must fight tyranny to the death, shhought. Of all human qualities she reverenced justice most. Herother was most god-like, her father most suppliant. And to which dihe yield, she thought, sitting between them, gazing at the shore whosoints were all unknown to her, and thinking how the lawn and therrace and the house were smoothed away now and peace dwelt there.
"Jasper," she said sullenly. He'd look after the puppy.
And what was she going to call him? her father persisted. He had ha dog when he was a little boy, called Frisk. She'll give way, Jamehought, as he watched a look come upon her face, a look he rememberedhey look down he thought, at their knitting or something. Theuddenly they look up. There was a flash of blue, he remembered, anhen somebody sitting with him laughed, surrendered, and he was verngry. It must have been his mother, he thought, sitting on a lohair, with his father standing over her. He began to search among thnfinite series of impressions which time had laid down, leaf upoeaf, fold upon fold softly, incessantly upon his brain; among scentsounds; voices, harsh, hollow, sweet; and lights passing, and broomapping; and the wash and hush of the sea, how a man had marched up anown and stopped dead, upright, over them. Meanwhile, he noticed, Caabbled her fingers in the water, and stared at the shore and saiothing. No, she won't give way, he thought; she's different, hhought. Well, if Cam would not answer him, he would not bother her Mramsay decided, feeling in his pocket for a book. But she would answeim; she wished, passionately, to move some obstacle that lay upon heongue and to say, Oh, yes, Frisk. I'll call him Frisk. She wanteven to say, Was that the dog that found its way over the moor aloneut try as she might, she could think of nothing to say like thatierce and loyal to the compact, yet passing on to her fathernsuspected by James, a private token of the love she felt for himor she thought, dabbling her hand (and now Macalister's boy had caugh mackerel, and it lay kicking on the floor, with blood on its gillsor she thought, looking at James who kept his eyes dispassionately ohe sail, or glanced now and then for a second at the horizon, you'rot exposed to it, to this pressure and division of feeling, thixtraordinary temptation. Her father was feeling in his pockets; inother second, he would have found his book. For no one attracted heore; his hands were beautiful, and his feet, and his voice, and hiords, and his haste, and his temper, and his oddity, and his passionnd his saying straight out before every one, we perish, each alonend his remoteness. (He had opened his book.) But what remainentolerable, she thought, sitting upright, and watching Macalister'oy tug the hook out of the gills of another fish, was that craslindness and tyranny of his which had poisoned her childhood anaised bitter storms, so that even now she woke in the night tremblinith rage and remembered some command of his; some insolence: "Dhis," "Do that," his dominance: his "Submit to me."
So she said nothing, but looked doggedly and sadly at the shorerapped in its mantle of peace; as if the people there had fallesleep, she thought; were free like smoke, were free to come and gike ghosts. They have no suffering there, she thought.
6
Yes, that is their boat, Lily Briscoe decided, standing on the edge ohe lawn. It was the boat with greyish-brown sails, which she saw nolatten itself upon the water and shoot off across the bay. There hits, she thought, and the children are quite silent still. And should not reach him either. The sympathy she had not given him weigheer down. It made it difficult for her to paint.
She had always found him difficult. She never had been able to praisim to his face, she remembered. And that reduced their relationship tomething neutral, without that element of sex in it which made hianner to Minta so gallant, almost gay. He would pick a flower foer, lend her his books. But could he believe that Minta read themhe dragged them about the garden, sticking in leaves to mark thlace.
"D'you remember, Mr. Carmichael?" she was inclined to ask, looking ahe old man. But he had pulled his hat half over his forehead; he wasleep, or he was dreaming, or he was lying there catching words, shupposed.
"D'you remember?" she felt inclined to ask him as she passed himhinking again of Mrs. Ramsay on the beach; the cask bobbing up anown; and the pages flying. Why, after all these years had thaurvived, ringed round, lit up, visible to the last detail, with alefore it blank and all after it blank, for miles and miles?
"Is it a boat? Is it a cork?" she would say, Lily repeated, turninack, reluctantly again, to her canvas. Heaven be praised for it, throblem of space remained, she thought, taking up her brush again. Ilared at her. The whole mass of the picture was poised upon thaeight. Beautiful and bright it should be on the surface, feathery anvanescent, one colour melting into another like the colours on utterfly's wing; but beneath the fabric must be clamped together witolts of iron. It was to be a thing you could ruffle with your breathnd a thing you could not dislodge with a team of horses. And she begao lay on a red, a grey, and she began to model her way into the hollohere. At the same time, she seemed to be sitting beside Mrs. Ramsay ohe beach.
"Is it a boat? Is it a cask?" Mrs. Ramsay said. And she began huntinound for her spectacles. And she sat, having found them, silentooking out to sea. And Lily, painting steadily, felt as if a door hapened, and one went in and stood gazing silently about in a higathedral-like place, very dark, very solemn. Shouts came from a worlar away. Steamers vanished in stalks of smoke on the horizonharles threw stones and sent them skipping.
Mrs. Ramsay sat silent. She was glad, Lily thought, to rest in silencencommunicative; to rest in the extreme obscurity of humaelationships. Who knows what we are, what we feel? Who knows even ahe moment of intimacy, This is knowledge? Aren't things spoilt thenrs. Ramsay may have asked (it seemed to have happened so often, thiilence by her side) by saying them? Aren't we more expressive thushe moment at least seemed extraordinarily fertile. She rammed ittle hole in the sand and covered it up, by way of burying in it therfection of the moment. It was like a drop of silver in which onipped and illumined the darkness of the past.
Lily stepped back to get her canvas--so--into perspective. It was add road to be walking, this of painting. Out and out one wenturther, until at last one seemed to be on a narrow plank, perfectllone, over the sea. And as she dipped into the blue paint, shipped too into the past there. Now Mrs. Ramsay got up, shemembered. It was time to go back to the house--time founcheon. And they all walked up from the beach together, she walkinehind with William Bankes, and there was Minta in front of them with ole in her stocking. How that little round hole of pink heel seemeo flaunt itself before them! How William Bankes deplored it, withouto far as she could remember, saying anything about it! It meant tim the annihilation of womanhood, and dirt and disorder, and servanteaving and beds not made at mid-day--all the things he most abhorrede had a way of shuddering and spreading his fingers out as if to coven unsightly object which he did now--holding his hand in front oim. And Minta walked on ahead, and presumably Paul met her and shent off with Paul in the garden.
The Rayleys, thought Lily Briscoe, squeezing her tube of green painthe collected her impressions of the Rayleys. Their lives appeared ter in a series of scenes; one, on the staircase at dawn. Paul haome in and gone to bed early; Minta was late. There was Mintareathed, tinted, garish on the stairs about three o'clock in thorning. Paul came out in his pyjamas carrying a poker in case ourglars. Minta was eating a sandwich, standing half-way up by indow, in the cadaverous early morning light, and the carpet had ole in it. But what did they say? Lily asked herself, as if booking she could hear them. Minta went on eating her sandwichnnoyingly, while he spoke something violent, abusing her, in a mutteo as not to wake the children, the two little boys. He was witheredrawn; she flamboyant, careless. For things had worked loose after thirst year or so; the marriage had turned out rather badly.
And this, Lily thought, taking the green paint on her brush, thiaking up scenes about them, is what we call "knowing" peoplethinking" of them, "being fond" of them! Not a word of it was truehe had made it up; but it was what she knew them by all the same. Shent on tunnelling her way into her picture, into the past.
Another time, Paul said he "played chess in coffee-houses." She hauilt up a whole structure of imagination on that saying too. Shemembered how, as he said it, she thought how he rang up the servantnd she said, "Mrs. Rayley's out, sir," and he decided that he would noome home either. She saw him sitting in the corner of some lugubrioulace where the smoke attached itself to the red plush seats, and thaitresses got to know you, and he played chess with a little man whas in the tea trade and lived at Surbiton, but that was all Paul knebout him. And then Minta was out when he came home and then there wahat scene on the stairs, when he got the poker in case of burglars (noubt to frighten her too) and spoke so bitterly, saying she had ruineis life. At any rate when she went down to see them at a cottage neaickmansworth, things were horribly strained. Paul took her down tharden to look at the Belgian hares which he bred, and Minta followehem, singing, and put her bare arm on his shoulder, lest he shoulell her anything.
Minta was bored by hares, Lily thought. But Minta never gave herselway. She never said things like that about playing chess in coffeeouses. She was far too conscious, far too wary. But to go on witheir story--they had got through the dangerous stage by now. She haeen staying with them last summer some time and the car broke down aninta had to hand him his tools. He sat on the road mending the carnd it was the way she gave him the tools--business-liketraightforward, friendly--that proved it was all right now. They werin love" no longer; no, he had taken up with another woman, a seriouoman, with her hair in a plait and a case in her hand (Minta haescribed her gratefully, almost admiringly), who went to meetings anhared Paul's views (they had got more and more pronounced) about thaxation of land values and a capital levy. Far from breaking up tharriage, that alliance had righted it. They were excellent friendsbviously, as he sat on the road and she handed him his tools.
So that was the story of the Rayleys, Lily thought. She imagineerself telling it to Mrs. Ramsay, who would be full of curiosity tnow what had become of the Rayleys. She would feel a littlriumphant, telling Mrs. Ramsay that the marriage had not been uccess.
But the dead, thought Lily, encountering some obstacle in her desighich made her pause and ponder, stepping back a foot or so, oh, thead! she murmured, one pitied them, one brushed them aside, one haven a little contempt for them. They are at our mercy. Mrs. Ramsaas faded and gone, she thought. We can over-ride her wishes, improvway her limited, old-fashioned ideas. She recedes further and furtherom us. Mockingly she seemed to see her there at the end of thorridor of years saying, of all incongruous things, "Marry, marry!sitting very upright early in the morning with the birds beginning theep in the garden outside). And one would have to say to her, It hall gone against your wishes. They're happy like that; I'm happy likhis. Life has changed completely. At that all her being, even heeauty, became for a moment, dusty and out of date. For a moment Lilytanding there, with the sun hot on her back, summing up the Rayleysriumphed over Mrs. Ramsay, who would never know how Paul went toffee-houses and had a mistress; how he sat on the ground and Mintanded him his tools; how she stood here painting, had never marriedot even William Bankes.
Mrs. Ramsay had planned it. Perhaps, had she lived, she would havompelled it. Already that summer he was "the kindest of men." He wathe first scientist of his age, my husband says." He was also "pooilliam--it makes me so unhappy, when I go to see him, to find nothinice in his house--no one to arrange the flowers." So they were senor walks together, and she was told, with that faint touch of ironhat made Mrs. Ramsay slip through one's fingers, that she had cientific mind; she liked flowers; she was so exact. What was thiania of hers for marriage? Lily wondered, stepping to and fro froer easel.
(Suddenly, as suddenly as a star slides in the sky, a reddish ligheemed to burn in her mind, covering Paul Rayley, issuing from him. Iose like a fire sent up in token of some celebration by savages on istant beach. She heard the roar and the crackle. The whole sea foiles round ran red and gold. Some winey smell mixed with it anntoxicated her, for she felt again her own headlong desire to throerself off the cliff and be drowned looking for a pearl brooch on each. And the roar and the crackle repelled her with fear anisgust, as if while she saw its splendour and power she saw too how ied on the treasure of the house, greedily, disgustingly, and shoathed it. But for a sight, for a glory it surpassed everything ier experience, and burnt year after year like a signal fire on esert island at the edge of the sea, and one had only to say "in lovend instantly, as happened now, up rose Paul's fire again. And it sannd she said to herself, laughing, "The Rayleys"; how Paul went toffee-houses and played chess.)
She had only escaped by the skin of her teeth though, she thought. Shad been looking at the table-cloth, and it had flashed upon her thahe would move the tree to the middle, and need never marry anybodynd she had felt an enormous exultation. She had felt, now she coultand up to Mrs. Ramsay--a tribute to the astonishing power that Mrsamsay had over one. Do this, she said, and one did it. Even hehadow at the window with James was full of authority. She remembereow William Bankes had been shocked by her neglect of the significancf mother and son. Did she not admire their beauty? he said. Builliam, she remembered, had listened to her with his wise child's eyehen she explained how it was not irreverence: how a light there neede shadow there and so on. She did not intend to disparage a subjechich, they agreed, Raphael had treated divinely. She was not cynicaluite the contrary. Thanks to his scientific mind he understood--roof of disinterested intelligence which had pleased her and comforteer enormously. One could talk of painting then seriously to a manndeed, his friendship had been one of the pleasures of her life. Shoved William Bankes.
They went to Hampton Court and he always left her, like the perfecentleman he was, plenty of time to wash her hands, while he strolley the river. That was typical of their relationship. Many things wereft unsaid. Then they strolled through the courtyards, and admiredummer after summer, the proportions and the flowers, and he would teler things, about perspective, about architecture, as they walked, ane would stop to look at a tree, or the view over the lake, and admir child--(it was his great grief--he had no daughter) in the vague alooay that was natural to a man who spent spent so much time iaboratories that the world when he came out seemed to dazzle himo that he walked slowly, lifted his hand to screen his eyes anaused, with his head thrown back, merely to breathe the air. Thee would tell her how his housekeeper was on her holiday; he musuy a new carpet for the staircase. Perhaps she would go with him tuy a new carpet for the staircase. And once something led him to talbout the Ramsays and he had said how when he first saw her she haeen wearing a grey hat; she was not more than nineteen or twenty. Shas astonishingly beautiful. There he stood looking down the avenue aampton Court as if he could see her there among the fountains.
She looked now at the drawing-room step. She saw, through William'yes, the shape of a woman, peaceful and silent, with downcast eyeshe sat musing, pondering (she was in grey that day, Lily thought)er eyes were bent. She would never lift them. Yes, thought Lilyooking intently, I must have seen her look like that, but not in greyor so still, nor so young, nor so peaceful. The figure came readilnough. She was astonishingly beautiful, as William said. But beautas not everything. Beauty had this penalty--it came too readily, camoo completely. It stilled life--froze it. One forgot the littlgitations; the flush, the pallor, some queer distortion, some light ohadow, which made the face unrecognisable for a moment and yet added uality one saw for ever after. It was simpler to smooth that all ounder the cover of beauty. But what was the look she had, Lilondered, when she clapped her deer-stalkers's hat on her head, or racross the grass, or scolded Kennedy, the gardener? Who could teler? Who could help her?
Against her will she had come to the surface, and found herself halut of the picture, looking, little dazedly, as if at unreal things, ar. Carmichael. He lay on his chair with his hands clasped above hiaunch not reading, or sleeping, but basking like a creature gorgeith existence. His book had fallen on to the grass.
She wanted to go straight up to him and say, "Mr. Carmichael!" Then hould look up benevolently as always, from his smoky vague green eyesut one only woke people if one knew what one wanted to say to themnd she wanted to say not one thing, but everything. Little words tharoke up the thought and dismembered it said nothing. "About lifebout death; about Mrs. Ramsay"--no, she thought, one could saothing to nobody. The urgency of the moment always missed its markords fluttered sideways and struck the object inches too low. Thene gave it up; then the idea sunk back again; then one became likost middle-aged people, cautious, furtive, with wrinkles between thyes and a look of perpetual apprehension. For how could one expresn words these emotions of the body? express that emptiness thereShe was looking at the drawing-room steps; they looked extraordinarilmpty.) It was one's body feeling, not one's mind. The physicaensations that went with the bare look of the steps had becomuddenly extremely unpleasant. To want and not to have, sent all uer body a hardness, a hollowness, a strain. And then to want and noo have--to want and want--how that wrung the heart, and wrung it againd again! Oh, Mrs. Ramsay! she called out silently, to that essenchich sat by the boat, that abstract one made of her, that woman irey, as if to abuse her for having gone, and then having gone, comack again. It had seemed so safe, thinking of her. Ghost, airothingness, a thing you could play with easily and safely at any timf day or night, she had been that, and then suddenly she put her hanut and wrung the heart thus. Suddenly, the empty drawing-room stepshe frill of the chair inside, the puppy tumbling on the terrace, thhole wave and whisper of the garden became like curves and arabesquelourishing round a centre of complete emptiness.
"What does it mean? How do you explain it all?" she wanted to sayurning to Mr. Carmichael again. For the whole world seemed to havissolved in this early morning hour into a pool of thought, a deeasin of reality, and one could almost fancy that had Mr. Carmichaepoken, for instance, a little tear would have rent the surface poolnd then? Something would emerge. A hand would be shoved up, a bladould be flashed. It was nonsense of course.
A curious notion came to her that he did after all hear the things should not say. He was an inscrutable old man, with the yellow stain ois beard, and his poetry, and his puzzles, sailing serenely through orld which satisfied all his wants, so that she thought he had only tut down his hand where he lay on the lawn to fish up anything hanted. She looked at her picture. That would have been his answerresumably--how "you" and "I" and "she" pass and vanish; nothing staysll changes; but not words, not paint. Yet it would be hung in thttics, she thought; it would be rolled up and flung under a sofa; yeven so, even of a picture like that, it was true. One might say, evef this scrawl, not of that actual picture, perhaps, but of what ittempted, that it "remained for ever," she was going to say, or, fohe words spoken sounded even to herself, too boastful, to hintordlessly; when, looking at the picture, she was surprised to finhat she could not see it. Her eyes were full of a hot liquid (she diot think of tears at first) which, without disturbing the firmness oer lips, made the air thick, rolled down her cheeks. She had perfecontrol of herself--Oh, yes!--in every other way. Was she crying theor Mrs. Ramsay, without being aware of any unhappiness? She addresseld Mr. Carmichael again. What was it then? What did it mean? Coulhings thrust their hands up and grip one; could the blade cut; thist grasp? Was there no safety? No learning by heart of the ways ohe world? No guide, no shelter, but all was miracle, and leaping frohe pinnacle of a tower into the air? Could it be, even for elderleople, that this was life?--startling, unexpected, unknown? For onoment she felt that if they both got up, here, now on the lawn, anemanded an explanation, why was it so short, why was it snexplicable, said it with violence, as two fully equipped human beingrom whom nothing should be hid might speak, then, beauty would roltself up; the space would fill; those empty flourishes would form inthape; if they shouted loud enough Mrs. Ramsay would return. "Mrsamsay!" she said aloud, "Mrs. Ramsay!" The tears ran down her face.
7
[Macalister's boy took one of the fish and cut a square out of its sido bait his hook with. The mutilated body (it was alive still) wahrown back into the sea.]
8
"Mrs. Ramsay!" Lily cried, "Mrs. Ramsay!" But nothing happened. The paincreased. That anguish could reduce one to such a pitch ombecility, she thought! Anyhow the old man had not heard her. Hemained benignant, calm--if one chose to think it, sublime. Heaven braised, no one had heard her cry that ignominious cry, stop paintop! She had not obviously taken leave of her senses. No one haeen her step off her strip of board into the waters of annihilationhe remained a skimpy old maid, holding a paint-brush.
And now slowly the pain of the want, and the bitter anger (to be calleack, just as she thought she would never feel sorrow for Mrs. Ramsagain. Had she missed her among the coffee cups at breakfast? not ihe least) lessened; and of their anguish left, as antidote, a reliehat was balm in itself, and also, but more mysteriously, a sense oome one there, of Mrs. Ramsay, relieved for a moment of the weight thahe world had put on her, staying lightly by her side and then (fohis was Mrs. Ramsay in all her beauty) raising to her forehead a wreatf white flowers with which she went. Lily squeezed her tubes againhe attacked that problem of the hedge. It was strange how clearly shaw her, stepping with her usual quickness across fields among whosolds, purplish and soft, among whose flowers, hyacinth or lilies, shanished. It was some trick of the painter's eye. For days after shad heard of her death she had seen her thus, putting her wreath to heorehead and going unquestioningly with her companion, a shade acroshe fields. The sight, the phrase, had its power to console. Wherevehe happened to be, painting, here, in the country or in London, thision would come to her, and her eyes, half closing, sought somethino base her vision on. She looked down the railway carriage, thmnibus; took a line from shoulder or cheek; looked at the windowpposite; at Piccadilly, lamp-strung in the evening. All had been parf the fields of death. But always something--it might be a face, oice, a paper boy crying STANDARD, NEWS--thrust through, snubbed heraked her, required and got in the end an effort of attention, so thahe vision must be perpetually remade. Now again, moved as she was bome instinctive need of distance and blue, she looked at the baeneath her, making hillocks of the blue bars of the waves, antony fields of the purpler spaces, again she was roused as usual bomething incongruous. There was a brown spot in the middle of thay. It was a boat. Yes, she realised that after a second. But whosoat? Mr. Ramsay's boat, she replied. Mr. Ramsay; the man who haarched past her, with his hand raised, aloof, at the head of rocession, in his beautiful boots, asking her for sympathy, whiche had refused. The boat was now half way across the bay.
So fine was the morning except for a streak of wind here and there thahe sea and sky looked all one fabric, as if sails were stuck high un the sky, or the clouds had dropped down into the sea. A steamer faut at sea had drawn in the air a great scroll of smoke which stayehere curving and circling decoratively, as if the air were a finauze which held things and kept them softly in its mesh, only gentlwaying them this way and that. And as happens sometimes when theather is very fine, the cliffs looked as if they were conscious ohe ships, and the ships looked as if they were conscious of thliffs, as if they signalled to each other some message of their ownor sometimes quite close to the shore, the Lighthouse looked thiorning in the haze an enormous distance away.
"Where are they now?" Lily thought, looking out to sea. Where was hehat very old man who had gone past her silently, holding a brown papearcel under his arm? The boat was in the middle of the bay.
9
They don't feel a thing there, Cam thought, looking at the shorehich, rising and falling, became steadily more distant and moreaceful. Her hand cut a trail in the sea, as her mind made the greewirls and streaks into patterns and, numbed and shrouded, wandered imagination in that underworld of waters where the pearls stuck ilusters to white sprays, where in the green light a change came ovene's entire mind and one's body shone half transparent enveloped in reen cloak.
Then the eddy slackened round her hand. The rush of the water ceasedhe world became full of little creaking and squeaking sounds. Oneard the waves breaking and flapping against the side of the boat af they were anchored in harbour. Everything became very close to oneor the sail, upon which James had his eyes fixed until it had becomo him like a person whom he knew, sagged entirely; there they came t stop, flapping about waiting for a breeze, in the hot sun, miles frohore, miles from the Lighthouse. Everything in the whole world seemeo stand still. The Lighthouse became immovable, and the line of thistant shore became fixed. The sun grew hotter and everybody seemeo come very close together and to feel each other's presence, whichey had almost forgotten. Macalister's fishing line went plumb downto the sea. But Mr. Ramsay went on reading with his legs curled undeim.
He was reading a little shiny book with covers mottled like a plover'gg. Now and again, as they hung about in that horrid calm, he turne page. And James felt that each page was turned with a peculiaesture aimed at him; now assertively, now commandingly; now with thntention of making people pity him; and all the time, as his fatheead and turned one after another of those little pages, James kepreading the moment when he would look up and speak sharply to hibout something or other. Why were they lagging about here? he woulemand, or something quite unreasonable like that. And if he doesames thought, then I shall take a knife and strike him to the heart.
He had always kept this old symbol of taking a knife and strikinis father to the heart. Only now, as he grew older, and sataring at his father in an  impotent rage, it was not him, that olan reading, whom he wanted to kill, but it was the thing thaescended on him--without his knowing it perhaps: that fierce suddelack-winged harpy, with its talons and its beak all cold and hardhat struck and struck at you (he could feel the beak on his bare legshere it had struck when he was a child) and then made off, and there was again, an old man, very sad, reading his book. That he woulill, that he would strike to the heart. Whatever he did--(and hight do anything, he felt, looking at the Lighthouse and the distanhore) whether he was in a business, in a bank, a barrister, a man ahe head of some enterprise, that he would fight, that he would tracown and stamp out--tyranny, despotism, he called it--making peoplo what they did not want to do, cutting off their right to speak. Hoould any of them say, But I won't, when he said, Come to thighthouse. Do this. Fetch me that. The black wings spread, and thard beak tore. And then next moment, there he sat reading his booknd he might look up--one never knew--quite reasonably. He might talo the Macalisters. He might be pressing a sovereign into some frozeld woman's hand in the street, James thought, and he might be shoutinut at some fisherman's sports; he might be waving his arms in the aiith excitement. Or he might sit at the head of the table dead silenrom one end of dinner to the other. Yes, thought James, while thoat slapped and dawdled there in the hot sun; there was a waste onow and rock very lonely and austere; and there he had come to feeluite often lately, when his father said something or did somethinhich surprised the others, there were two pairs of footprints onlyis own and his father's. They alone knew each other. What then wahis terror, this hatred? Turning back among the many leavehich the past had folded in him, peering into the heart of thaorest where light and shade so chequer each other that all shaps distorted, and one blunders, now with the sun in one's eyesow with a dark shadow, he sought an image to cool and detach and rounff his feeling in a concrete shape. Suppose then that as a chilitting helpless in a perambulator, or on some one's knee, he had see waggon crush ignorantly and innocently, some one's foot? Suppose had seen the foot first, in the grass, smooth, and whole; then thheel; and the same foot, purple, crushed. But the wheel was innocento now, when his father came striding down the passage knocking them uarly in the morning to go to the Lighthouse down it came over hioot, over Cam's foot, over anybody's foot. One sat and watched it.
But whose foot was he thinking of, and in what garden did all thiappen? For one had settings for these scenes; trees that grew therelowers; a certain light; a few figures. Everything tended to setself in a garden where there was none of this gloom. None of thihrowing of hands about; people spoke in an ordinary tone of voicehey went in and out all day long. There was an old woman gossiping ihe kitchen; and the blinds were sucked in and out by the breeze; alas blowing, all was growing; and over all those plates and bowls anall brandishing red and yellow flowers a very thin yellow veil woule drawn, like a vine leaf, at night. Things became stiller and darket night. But the leaf-like veil was so fine, that lights lifted itoices crinkled it; he could see through it a figure stooping, hearoming close, going away, some dress rustling, some chain tinkling.
It was in this world that the wheel went over the person's footomething, he remembered, stayed flourished up in the air, somethinrid and sharp descended even there, like a blade, a scimitar, smitinhrough the leaves and flowers even of that happy world and making ihrivel and fall.
"It will rain," he remembered his father saying. "You won't be able to to the Lighthouse."
The Lighthouse was then a silvery, misty-looking tower with a yelloye, that opened suddenly, and softly in the evening. Now--
James looked at the Lighthouse. He could see the white-washed rockshe tower, stark and straight; he could see that it was barred witlack and white; he could see windows in it; he could even see washinpread on the rocks to dry. So that was the Lighthouse, was it?
No, the other was also the Lighthouse. For nothing was simply onhing. The other Lighthouse was true too. It was sometimes hardly te seen across the bay. In the evening one looked up and saw the eypening and shutting and the light seemed to reach them in that airunny garden where they sat.
But he pulled himself up. Whenever he said "they" or "a person," anhen began hearing the rustle of some one coming, the tinkle of somne going, he became extremely sensitive to the presence of whoeveight be in the room. It was his father now. The strain was acuteor in one moment if there was no breeze, his father would slap thovers of his book together, and say: "What's happening now? What are dawdling about here for, eh?" as, once before he had brought hilade down among them on the terrace and she had gone stiff all overnd if there had been an axe handy, a knife, or anything with a sharoint he would have seized it and struck his father through the hearthe had gone stiff all over, and then, her arm slackening, so that helt she listened to him no longer, she had risen somehow and gone awand left him there, impotent, ridiculous, sitting on the floor graspin pair of scissors.
Not a breath of wind blew. The water chuckled and gurgled in thottom of the boat where three or four mackerel beat their tails up anown in a pool of water not deep enough to cover them. At any momenr. Ramsay (he scarcely dared look at him) might rouse himself, shut hiook, and say something sharp; but for the moment he was reading, shat James stealthily, as if he were stealing downstairs on bare feetfraid of waking a watchdog by a creaking board, went on thinking whaas she like, where did she go that day? He began following her frooom to room and at last they came to a room where in a blue light, af the reflection came from many china dishes, she talked to somebodye listened to her talking. She talked to a servant, saying simplhatever came into her head. She alone spoke the truth; to her alonould he speak it. That was the source of her everlasting attractioor him, perhaps; she was a person to whom one could say what came intne's head. But all the time he thought of her, he was conscious ois father following his thought, surveying it, making it shiver analter. At last he ceased to think.
There he sat with his hand on the tiller in the sun, staring at thighthouse, powerless to move, powerless to flick off these grains oisery which settled on his mind one after another. A rope seemed tind him there, and his father had knotted it and he could only escapy taking a knife and plunging it... But at that moment the saiwung slowly round, filled slowly out, the boat seemed to shakerself, and then to move off half conscious in her sleep, and then shoke and shot through the waves. The relief was extraordinary. Thell seemed to fall away from each other again and to be at theiase, and the fishing-lines slanted taut across the side of thoat. But his father did not rouse himself. He only raised his righand mysteriously high in the air, and let it fall upon his knee agais if he were conducting some secret symphony.
10
[The sea without a stain on it, thought Lily Briscoe, still standinnd looking out over the bay. The sea stretched like silk across thay. Distance had an extraordinary power; they had been swallowed un it, she felt, they were gone for ever, they had become part of thature of things. It was so calm; it was so quiet. The steamer itselad vanished, but the great scroll of smoke still hung in the air anrooped like a flag mournfully in valediction.]
11
It was like that then, the island, thought Cam, once more drawing heingers through the waves. She had never seen it from out at seefore. It lay like that on the sea, did it, with a dent in the middlnd two sharp crags, and the sea swept in there, and spread away foiles and miles on either side of the island. It was very smallhaped something like a leaf stood on end. So we took a little boathe thought, beginning to tell herself a story of adventure abouscaping from a sinking ship. But with the sea streaming through heingers, a spray of seaweed vanishing behind them, she did not want tell herself seriously a story; it was the sense of adventure anscape that she wanted, for she was thinking, as the boat sailed onow her father's anger about the points of the compass, James'bstinacy about the compact, and her own anguish, all had slipped, alad passed, all had streamed away. What then came next? Where werhey going? From her hand, ice cold, held deep in the sea, therpurted up a fountain of joy at the change, at the escape, at thdventure (that she should be alive, that she should be there). Anhe drops falling from this sudden and unthinking fountain of joy felere and there on the dark, the slumbrous shapes in her mind; shapes o world not realised but turning in their darkness, catching here anhere, a spark of light; Greece, Rome, Constantinople. Small as ias, and shaped something like a leaf stood on its end with the goldprinkled waters flowing in and about it, it had, she supposed, a placn the universe--even that little island? The old gentlemen in thtudy she thought could have told her. Sometimes she strayed in frohe garden purposely to catch them at it. There they were (it might br. Carmichael or Mr. Bankes who was sitting with her father) sittinpposite each other in their low arm-chairs. They were crackling iront of them the pages of THE TIMES, when she came in from the gardenll in a muddle, about something some one had said about Christ, oearing that a mammoth had been dug up in a London street, or wonderinhat Napoleon was like. Then they took all this with their clean handthey wore grey-coloured clothes; they smelt of heather) and therushed the scraps together, turning the paper, crossing their kneesnd said something now and then very brief. Just to please herself should take a book from the shelf and stand there, watching her fatherite, so equally, so neatly from one side of the page to another, wit little cough now and then, or something said briefly to the other olentleman opposite. And she thought, standing there with her book openne could let whatever one thought expand here like a leaf in waternd if it did well here, among the old gentlemen smoking and THE TIMErackling then it was right. And watching her father as he wrote iis study, she thought (now sitting in the boat) he was not vain, nor yrant and did not wish to make you pity him. Indeed, if he saw shas there, reading a book, he would ask her, as gently as any onould, Was there nothing he could give her?
Lest this should be wrong, she looked at him reading the little booith the shiny cover mottled like a plover's egg. No; it was rightook at him now, she wanted to say aloud to James. (But James had hiye on the sail.) He is a sarcastic brute, James would say. He bringhe talk round to himself and his books, James would say. He intolerably egotistical. Worst of all, he is a tyrant. But look! shaid, looking at him. Look at him now. She looked at him reading thittle book with his legs curled; the little book whose yellowish pagehe knew, without knowing what was written on them. It was small; ias closely printed; on the fly-leaf, she knew, he had written that had spent fifteen francs on dinner; the wine had been so much; he haiven so much to the waiter; all was added up neatly at the bottom ohe page. But what might be written in the book which had rounded itdges off in his pocket, she did not know. What he thought they nonf them knew. But he was absorbed in it, so that when he looked up, ae did now for an instant, it was not to see anything; it was to piown some thought more exactly. That done, his mind flew back againd he plunged into his reading. He read, she thought, as if he weruiding something, or wheedling a large flock of sheep, or pushing hiay up and up a single narrow path; and sometimes he went fast antraight, and broke his way through the bramble, and sometimes ieemed a branch struck at him, a bramble blinded him, but he was nooing to let himself be beaten by that; on he went, tossing over pagfter page. And she went on telling herself a story about escapinrom a sinking ship, for she was safe, while he sat there; safe, as shelt herself when she crept in from the garden, and took a booown, and the old gentleman, lowering the paper suddenly, saiomething very brief over the top of it about the character of Napoleon.
She gazed back over the sea, at the island. But the leaf was losints sharpness. It was very small; it was very distant. The sea waore important now than the shore. Waves were all round them, tossinnd sinking, with a log wallowing down one wave; a gull riding onother. About here, she thought, dabbling her fingers in the water, hip had sunk, and she murmured, dreamily half asleep, how we perishedach alone.
12
So much depends then, thought Lily Briscoe, looking at the sea whicad scarcely a stain on it, which was so soft that the sails and thlouds seemed set in its blue, so much depends, she thought, upoistance: whether people are near us or far from us; for her feelinor Mr. Ramsay changed as he sailed further and further across the bayt seemed to be elongated, stretched out; he seemed to become more anore remote. He and his children seemed to be swallowed up in thalue, that distance; but here, on the lawn, close at hand, Mrarmichael suddenly grunted. She laughed. He clawed his book up frohe grass. He settled into his chair again puffing and blowing likome sea monster. That was different altogether, because he was sear. And now again all was quiet. They must be out of bed by thiime, she supposed, looking at the house, but nothing appeared thereut then, she remembered, they had always made off directly a meal waver, on business of their own. It was all in keeping with thiilence, this emptiness, and the unreality of the early morning hourt was a way things had sometimes, she thought, lingering for a momennd looking at the long glittering windows and the plume of blue smokehey became illness, before habits had spun themselves across thurface, one felt that same unreality, which was so startling; felomething emerge. Life was most vivid then. One could be at one'ase. Mercifully one need not say, very briskly, crossing the lawn treet old Mrs. Beckwith, who would be coming out to find a corner to sin, "Oh, good-morning, Mrs. Beckwith! What a lovely day! Are you goino be so bold as to sit in the sun? Jasper's hidden the chairs. Det me find you one!" and all the rest of the usual chatter. One neeot speak at all. One glided, one shook one's sails (there was a gooeal of movement in the bay, boats were starting off) between thingseyond things. Empty it was not, but full to the brim. She seemed te standing up to the lips in some substance, to move and float anink in it, yes, for these waters were unfathomably deep. Into thead spilled so many lives. The Ramsays'; the children's; and all sortf waifs and strays of things besides. A washer-woman with her basket rook, a red-hot poker; the purples and grey-greens of flowers: somommon feeling which held the whole together.
It was some such feeling of completeness perhaps which, ten years agotanding almost where she stood now, had made her say that she must bn love with the place. Love had a thousand shapes. There might bovers whose gift it was to choose out the elements of things and plachem together and so, giving them a wholeness not theirs in life, makf some scene, or meeting of people (all now gone and separate), one ohose globed compacted things over which thought lingers, and lovlays.
Her eyes rested on the brown speck of Mr. Ramsay's sailing boat. Theould be at the Lighthouse by lunch time she supposed. But the winad freshened, and, as the sky changed slightly and the sea changelightly and the boats altered their positions, the view, which oment before had seemed miraculously fixed, was now unsatisfactoryhe wind had blown the trail of smoke about; there was somethinispleasing about the placing of the ships.
The disproportion there seemed to upset some harmony in her own mindhe felt an obscure distress. It was confirmed when she turned to heicture. She had been wasting her morning. For whatever reason should not achieve that razor edge of balance between two oppositorces; Mr. Ramsay and the picture; which was necessary. There waomething perhaps wrong with the design? Was it, she wondered, thahe line of the wall wanted breaking, was it that the mass of the treeas too heavy? She smiled ironically; for had she not thought, whehe began, that she had solved her problem?
What was the problem then? She must try to get hold of something thvaded her. It evaded her when she thought of Mrs. Ramsay; it evadeer now when she thought of her picture. Phrases came. Visions cameeautiful pictures. Beautiful phrases. But what she wished to get holf was that very jar on the nerves, the thing itself before it has beeade anything. Get that and start afresh; get that and start afreshhe said desperately, pitching herself firmly again before her easelt was a miserable machine, an inefficient machine, she thought, thuman apparatus for painting or for feeling; it always broke down ahe critical moment; heroically, one must force it on. She staredrowning. There was the hedge, sure enough. But one got nothing boliciting urgently. One got only a glare in the eye from looking ahe line of the wall, or from thinking--she wore a grey hat. She wastonishingly beautiful. Let it come, she thought, if it will comeor there are moments when one can neither think nor feel. And ine can neither think nor feel, she thought, where is one?
Here on the grass, on the ground, she thought, sitting down, anxamining with her brush a little colony of plantains. For the lawas very rough. Here sitting on the world, she thought, for she coulot shake herself free from the sense that everything this morning waappening for the first time, perhaps for the last time, as raveller, even though he is half asleep, knows, looking out of thrain window, that he must look now, for he will never see that townr that mule-cart, or that woman at work in the fields, again. Thawn was the world; they were up here together, on this exaltetation, she thought, looking at old Mr. Carmichael, who seemed (thoughey had not said a word all this time) to share her thoughts. And should never see him again perhaps. He was growing old. Also, shemembered, smiling at the slipper that dangled from his foot, he warowing famous. People said that his poetry was "so beautiful." Theent and published things he had written forty years ago. There was amous man now called Carmichael, she smiled, thinking how many shapene person might wear, how he was that in the newspapers, but here thame as he had always been. He looked the same--greyer, ratheres, he looked the same, but somebody had said, she recalled, that whee had heard of Andrew Ramsay's death (he was killed in a second by hell; he should have been a great mathematician) Mr. Carmichael halost all interest in life." What did it mean--that? she wondered. Hae marched through Trafalgar Square grasping a big stick? Had hurned pages over and over, without reading them, sitting in his roon St. John's Wood alone? She did not know what he had done, when heard that Andrew was killed, but she felt it in him all the samehey only mumbled at each other on staircases; they looked up at thky and said it will be fine or it won't be fine. But this was one waf knowing people, she thought: to know the outline, not the detail, tit in one's garden and look at the slopes of a hill running purplown into the distant heather. She knew him in that way. She knehat he had changed somehow. She had never read a line of his poetryhe thought that she knew how it went though, slowly and sonorouslyt was seasoned and mellow. It was about the desert and the camel. Ias about the palm tree and the sunset. It was extremely impersonalt said something about death; it said very little about love. Theras an impersonality about him. He wanted very little of other peoplead he not always lurched rather awkwardly past the drawing-room windoith some newspaper under his arm, trying to avoid Mrs. Ramsay whom foome reason he did not much like? On that account, of course, should always try to make him stop. He would bow to her. He would halnwillingly and bow profoundly. Annoyed that he did not want anythinf her, Mrs. Ramsay would ask him (Lily could hear her) wouldn't he lik coat, a rug, a newspaper? No, he wanted nothing. (Here he bowed.here was some quality in her which he did not much like. It waerhaps her masterfulness, her positiveness, something matter-of-facn her. She was so direct.
(A noise drew her attention to the drawing-room window--the squeak of inge. The light breeze was toying with the window.)
There must have been people who disliked her very much, Lily thoughYes; she realised that the drawing-room step was empty, but it had nffect on her whatever. She did not want Mrs. Ramsay now.)--People whhought her too sure, too drastic.
Also, her beauty offended people probably. How monotonous, they woulay, and the same always! They preferred another type--the dark, thivacious. Then she was weak with her husband. She let him make thoscenes. Then she was reserved. Nobody knew exactly what had happeneo her. And (to go back to Mr. Carmichael and his dislike) one could nomagine Mrs. Ramsay standing painting, lying reading, a whole morning ohe lawn. It was unthinkable. Without saying a word, the only token oer errand a basket on her arm, she went off to the town, to the pooro sit in some stuffy little bedroom. Often and often Lily had seeer go silently in the midst of some game, some discussion, with heasket on her arm, very upright. She had noted her return. She hahought, half laughing (she was so methodical with the tea cups), haloved (her beauty took one's breath away), eyes that are closing iain have looked on you. You have been with them there.
And then Mrs. Ramsay would be annoyed because somebody was late, or thutter not fresh, or the teapot chipped. And all the time she waaying that the butter was not fresh one would be thinking of Greeemples, and how beauty had been with them there in that stuffy littloom. She never talked of it--she went, punctually, directly. It waer instinct to go, an instinct like the swallows for the south, thrtichokes for the sun, turning her infallibly to the human raceaking her nest in its heart. And this, like all instincts, was ittle distressing to people who did not share it; to Mr. Carmichaeerhaps, to herself certainly. Some notion was in both of them abouhe ineffectiveness of action, the supremacy of thought. Her going wa reproach to them, gave a different twist to the world, so that theere led to protest, seeing their own prepossessions disappear, anlutch at them vanishing. Charles Tansley did that too: it was part ohe reason why one disliked him. He upset the proportions of one'orld. And what had happened to him, she wondered, idly stirring thlatains with her brush. He had got his fellowship. He had marriede lived at Golder's Green.
She had gone one day into a Hall and heard him speaking during the ware was denouncing something: he was condemning somebody. He wareaching brotherly love. And all she felt was how could he love hiind who did not know one picture from another, who had stood behiner smoking shag ("fivepence an ounce, Miss Briscoe") and making it hiusiness to tell her women can't write, women can't paint, not so muchat he believed it, as that for some odd reason he wished it? There was lean and red and raucous, preaching love from a platform (therere ants crawling about among the plantains which she disturbed witer brush--red, energetic, shiny ants, rather like Charles Tansley)he had looked at him ironically from her seat in the half-empty hallumping love into that chilly space, and suddenly, there was the olask or whatever it was bobbing up and down among the waves and Mrsamsay looking for her spectacle case among the pebbles. "Oh, dearhat a nuisance! Lost again. Don't bother, Mr. Tansley. I loshousands every summer," at which he pressed his chin back against hiollar, as if afraid to sanction such exaggeration, but could stand in her whom he liked, and smiled very charmingly. He must havonfided in her on one of those long expeditions when people goeparated and walked back alone. He was educating his little sisterrs. Ramsay had told her. It was immensely to his credit. Her own idef him was grotesque, Lily knew well, stirring the plantains with herush. Half one's notions of other people were, after all, grotesquehey served private purposes of one's own. He did for her instead of hipping-boy. She found herself flagellating his lean flanks when shas out of temper. If she wanted to be serious about him she had telp herself to Mrs. Ramsay's sayings, to look at him through her eyes.
She raised a little mountain for the ants to climb over. She reducehem to a frenzy of indecision by this interference in their cosmogonyome ran this way, others that.
One wanted fifty pairs of eyes to see with, she reflected. Fifty pairf eyes were not enough to get round that one woman with, she thoughtmong them, must be one that was stone blind to her beauty. One wanteost some secret sense, fine as air, with which to steal througeyholes and surround her where she sat knitting, talking, sittinilent in the window alone; which took to itself and treasured up likhe air which held the smoke of the steamer, her thoughts, hemaginations, her desires. What did the hedge mean to her, what dihe garden mean to her, what did it mean to her when a wave brokeLily looked up, as she had seen Mrs. Ramsay look up; she too heard ave falling on the beach.) And then what stirred and trembled in heind when the children cried, "How's that? How's that?" cricketinghe would stop knitting for a second. She would look intent. Then should lapse again, and suddenly Mr. Ramsay stopped dead in his pacing iront of her and some curious shock passed through her and seemed tock her in profound agitation on its breast when stopping there htood over her and looked down at her. Lily could see him.
He stretched out his hand and raised her from her chair. It seemeomehow as if he had done it before; as if he had once bent in the samay and raised her from a boat which, lying a few inches off somsland, had required that the ladies should thus be helped on shore bhe gentlemen. An old-fashioned scene that was, which requiredery nearly, crinolines and peg-top trousers. Letting herself belped by him, Mrs. Ramsay had thought (Lily supposed) the timas come now. Yes, she would say it now. Yes, she would marry himnd she stepped slowly, quietly on shore. Probably she said onord only, letting her hand rest still in his. I will marry youhe might have said, with her hand in his; but no more. Timfter time the same thrill had passed between them--obviously iad, Lily thought, smoothing a way for her ants. She was nonventing; she was only trying to smooth out something she had beeiven years ago folded up; something she had seen. For in the rougnd tumble of daily life, with all those children about, all thosisitors, one had constantly a sense of repetition--of one thinalling where another had fallen, and so setting up an echo whichimed in the air and made it full of vibrations.
But it would be a mistake, she thought, thinking how they walked ofogether, arm in arm, past the greenhouse, to simplify theielationship. It was no monotony of bliss--she with her impulses anuicknesses; he with his shudders and glooms. Oh, no. The bedroom dooould slam violently early in the morning. He would start from thable in a temper. He would whizz his plate through the window. Thell through the house there would be a sense of doors slamming anlinds fluttering, as if a gusty wind were blowing and people scuddebout trying in a hasty way to fasten hatches and make things shiphape. She had met Paul Rayley like that one day on the stairshey had laughed and laughed, like a couple of children, all becausr. Ramsay, finding an earwig in his milk at breakfast had sent thhole thing flying through the air on to the terrace outside. 'An earwigrue murmured, awestruck, 'in his milk.' Other people might finentipedes. But he had built round him such a fence of sanctity, anccupied the space with such a demeanour of majesty that an earwin his milk was a monster.
But it tired Mrs. Ramsay, it cowed her a little--the plates whizzinnd the doors slamming. And there would fall between them sometimeong rigid silences, when, in a state of mind which annoyed Liln her, half plaintive, half resentful, she seemed unable to surmounhe tempest calmly, or to laugh as they laughed, but in her wearineserhaps concealed something. She brooded and sat silent. After ime he would hang stealthily about the places where she was--roaminnder the window where she sat writing letters or talking, for should take care to be busy when he passed, and evade him, and pretenot to see him. Then he would turn smooth as silk, affable, urbanend try to win her so. Still she would hold off, and now she woulssert for a brief season some of those prides and airs the duf her beauty which she was generally utterly without; would turer head; would look so, over her shoulder, always with sominta, Paul, or William Bankes at her side. At length, standinutside the group the very figure of a famished wolfhound (Lily got uff the grass and stood looking at the steps, at the window, where shad seen him), he would say her name, once only, for all the world lik wolf barking in the snow, but still she held back; and he would sat once more, and this time something in the tone would rouse her, anhe would go to him, leaving them all of a sudden, and they would walff together among the pear trees, the cabbages, and the raspberreds. They would have it out together. But with what attitudes anith what words? Such a dignity was theirs in this relationship thaturning away, she and Paul and Minta would hide their curiosity anheir discomfort, and begin picking flowers, throwing ballshattering, until it was time for dinner, and there they were, he ane end of the table, she at the other, as usual.
"Why don't some of you take up botany?.. With all those legs and armhy doesn't one of you...?" So they would talk as usual, laughingmong the children. All would be as usual, save only for some quivers of a blade in the air, which came and went between them as ihe usual sight of the children sitting round their soup platead freshened itself in their eyes after that hour among the pears anhe cabbages. Especially, Lily thought, Mrs. Ramsay would glance arue. She sat in the middle between brothers and sisters, alwayccupied, it seemed, seeing that nothing went wrong so that shcarcely spoke herself. How Prue must have blamed herself for thaarwig in the milk How white she had gone when Mr. Ramsay threw hilate through the window! How she drooped under those long silenceetween them! Anyhow, her mother now would seem to be making it up ter; assuring her that everything was well; promising her that one ohese days that same happiness would be hers. She had enjoyed it foess than a year, however.
She had let the flowers fall from her basket, Lily thought, screwing uer eyes and standing back as if to look at her picture, which she waot touching, however, with all her faculties in a trance, frozen oveuperficially but moving underneath with extreme speed.
She let her flowers fall from her basket, scattered and tumbled them oo the grass and, reluctantly and hesitatingly, but without question oomplaint--had she not the faculty of obedience to perfection?--wenoo. Down fields, across valleys, white, flower-strewn--that waow she would have painted it. The hills were austere. It was rockyt was steep. The waves sounded hoarse on the stones beneath. Theent, the three of them together, Mrs. Ramsay walking rather fast iront, as if she expected to meet some one round the corner.
Suddenly the window at which she was looking was whitened by some lightuff behind it. At last then somebody had come into the drawing-roomomebody was sitting in the chair. For Heaven's sake, she prayed, lehem sit still there and not come floundering out to talk to herercifully, whoever it was stayed still inside; had settled by somtroke of luck so as to throw an odd-shaped triangular shadow over thtep. It altered the composition of the picture a little. It wanteresting. It might be useful. Her mood was coming back to her. Onust keep on looking without for a second relaxing the intensity omotion, the determination not to be put off, not to be bamboozledne must hold the scene--so--in a vise and let nothing come in anpoil it. One wanted, she thought, dipping her brush deliberately, te on a level with ordinary experience, to feel simply that's a chairhat's a table, and yet at the same time, It's a miracle, it's acstasy. The problem might be solved after all. Ah, but what haappened? Some wave of white went over the window pane. The air musave stirred some flounce in the room. Her heart leapt at her aneized her and tortured her.
"Mrs. Ramsay! Mrs. Ramsay!" she cried, feeling the old horror comack--to want and want and not to have. Could she inflict that stillnd then, quietly, as if she refrained, that too became part ordinary experience, was on a level with the chair, with the tablers. Ramsay--it was part of her perfect goodness--sat there quitimply, in the chair, flicked her needles to and fro, knitted heeddish-brown stocking, cast her shadow on the step. There she sat.
And as if she had something she must share, yet could hardly leave heasel, so full her mind was of what she was thinking, of what she waeeing, Lily went past Mr. Carmichael holding her brush to the edge ohe lawn. Where was that boat now? And Mr. Ramsay? She wanted him.
13
Mr. Ramsay had almost done reading. One hand hovered over the page af to be in readiness to turn it the very instant he had finished ite sat there bareheaded with the wind blowing his hair aboutxtraordinarily exposed to everything. He looked very old. He lookedames thought, getting his head now against the Lighthouse, now againshe waste of waters running away into the open, like some old stonying on the sand; he looked as if he had become physically what walways at the back of both of their minds--that loneliness which waor both of them the truth about things.
He was reading very quickly, as if he were eager to get to the endndeed they were very close to the Lighthouse now. There it loomed uptark and straight, glaring white and black, and one could see thaves breaking in white splinters like smashed glass upon the rocksne could see lines and creases in the rocks. One could see thindows clearly; a dab of white on one of them, and a little tuft oreen on the rock. A man had come out and looked at them through lass and gone in again. So it was like that, James thought, thighthouse one had seen across the bay all these years; it was a starower on a bare rock. It satisfied him. It confirmed some obscureeling of his about his own character. The old ladies, he thoughthinking of the garden at home, went dragging their chairs about on thawn. Old Mrs. Beckwith, for example, was always saying how nice it wand how sweet it was and how they ought to be so proud and they ougho be so happy, but as a matter of fact, James thought, looking at thighthouse stood there on its rock, it's like that. He looked at hiather reading fiercely with his legs curled tight. They shared thanowledge. "We are driving before a gale--we must sink," he begaaying to himself, half aloud, exactly as his father said it.
Nobody seemed to have spoken for an age. Cam was tired of looking ahe sea. Little bits of black cork had floated past; the fish weread in the bottom of the boat. Still her father read, and Jameooked at him and she looked at him, and they vowed that they woulight tyranny to the death, and he went on reading quite unconscious ohat they thought. It was thus that he escaped, she thought. Yesith his great forehead and his great nose, holding his little mottleook firmly in front of him, he escaped. You might try to lay hands oim, but then like a bird, he spread his wings, he floated off tettle out of your reach somewhere far away on some desolate stumphe gazed at the immense expanse of the sea. The island had grown small that it scarcely looked like a leaf any longer. It looked likhe top of a rock which some wave bigger than the rest would coveret in its frailty were all those paths, those terraces, those bedrooms-ll those innumberable things. But as, just before sleep, thingimplify themselves so that only one of all the myriad details haower to assert itself, so, she felt, looking drowsily at the islandll those paths and terraces and bedrooms were fading and disappearingnd nothing was left but a pale blue censer swinging rhythmically thiay and that across her mind. It was a hanging garden; it was alley, full of birds, and flowers, and antelopes... She was fallinsleep.
"Come now," said Mr. Ramsay, suddenly shutting his book.
Come where? To what extraordinary adventure? She woke with a starto land somewhere, to climb somewhere? Where was he leading them? Fofter his immense silence the words startled them. But it was absurde was hungry, he said. It was time for lunch. Besides, look, haid. "There's the Lighthouse. We're almost there."
"He's doing very well," said Macalister, praising James. "He's keepiner very steady."
But his father never praised him, James thought grimly.
Mr. Ramsay opened the parcel and shared out the sandwiches among themow he was happy, eating bread and cheese with these fishermen. Hould have liked to live in a cottage and lounge about in the harboupitting with the other old men, James thought, watching him slice hiheese into thin yellow sheets with his penknife.
This is right, this is it, Cam kept feeling, as she peeled her hardoiled egg. Now she felt as she did in the study when the old men wereading THE TIMES. Now I can go on thinking whatever I like, and han't fall over a precipice or be drowned, for there he is, keepinis eye on me, she thought.
At the same time they were sailing so fast along by the rocks that ias very exciting--it seemed as if they were doing two things at oncehey were eating their lunch here in the sun and they were also makinor safety in a great storm after a shipwreck. Would the water lastould the provisions last? she asked herself, telling herself a storut knowing at the same time what was the truth.
They would soon be out of it, Mr. Ramsay was saying to old Macalisterut their children would see some strange things. Macalister said has seventy-five last March; Mr. Ramsay was seventy-one. Macalister saie had never seen a doctor; he had never lost a tooth. And that's thay I'd like my children to live--Cam was sure that her father wahinking that, for he stopped her throwing a sandwich into the sea anold her, as if he were thinking of the fishermen and how they livedhat if she did not want it she should put it back in the parcel. Shhould not waste it. He said it so wisely, as if he knew so well alhe things that happened in the world that she put it back at once, anhen he gave her, from his own parcel, a gingerbread nut, as if he wer great Spanish gentleman, she thought, handing a flower to a lady at indow (so courteous his manner was). He was shabby, and simpleating bread and cheese; and yet he was leading them on a greaxpedition where, for all she knew, they would be drowned.
"That was where she sunk," said Macalister's boy suddenly.
Three men were drowned where we are now, the old man said. He had seehem clinging to the mast himself. And Mr. Ramsay taking a look at thpot was about, James and Cam were afraid, to burst out:
But I beneath a rougher sea,
and if he did, they could not bear it; they would shriek aloud; theould not endure another explosion of the passion that boiled in himut to their surprise all he said was "Ah" as if he thought to himselfut why make a fuss about that? Naturally men are drowned in a stormut it is a perfectly straightforward affair, and the depths of the sehe sprinkled the crumbs from his sandwich paper over them) are onlater after all. Then having lighted his pipe he took out his watche looked at it attentively; he made, perhaps, some mathematicaalculation. At last he said, triumphantly:
"Well done!" James had steered them like a born sailor.
There! Cam thought, addressing herself silently to James. You've got at last. For she knew that this was what James had been wantingnd she knew that now he had got it he was so pleased that he would noook at her or at his father or at any one. There he sat with his hann the tiller sitting bolt upright, looking rather sulky and frowninlightly. He was so pleased that he was not going to let anybody shar grain of his pleasure. His father had praised him. They must thinhat he was perfectly indifferent. But you've got it now, Cam thought.
They had tacked, and they were sailing swiftly, buoyantly on lonocking waves which handed them on from one to another with axtraordinary lilt and exhilaration beside the reef. On the left ow of rocks showed brown through the water which thinned anecame greener and on one, a higher rock, a wave incessantly broknd spurted a little column of drops which fell down in a shower. Onould hear the slap of the water and the patter of falling drops and ind of hushing and hissing sound from the waves rolling and gambollinnd slapping the rocks as if they were wild creatures who wererfectly free and tossed and tumbled and sported like this for ever.
Now they could see two men on the Lighthouse, watching them and makineady to meet them.
Mr. Ramsay buttoned his coat, and turned up his trousers. He took tharge, badly packed, brown paper parcel which Nancy had got ready anat with it on his knee. Thus in complete readiness to land he saooking back at the island. With his long-sighted eyes perhaps hould see the dwindled leaf-like shape standing on end on a plate oold quite clearly. What could he see? Cam wondered. It was all lur to her. What was he thinking now? she wondered. What was it hought, so fixedly, so intently, so silently? They watched him, botf them, sitting bareheaded with his parcel on his knee staring antaring at the frail blue shape which seemed like the vapour oomething that had burnt itself away. What do you want? they botanted to ask. They both wanted to say, Ask us anything and we wilive it you. But he did not ask them anything. He sat and looked ahe island and he might be thinking, We perished, each alone, or hight be thinking, I have reached it. I have found it; but he saiothing.
Then he put on his hat.
"Bring those parcels," he said, nodding his head at the things Nancad done up for them to take to the Lighthouse. "The parcels for thighthouse men," he said. He rose and stood in the bow of the boatery straight and tall, for all the world, James thought, as if he weraying, "There is no God," and Cam thought, as if he were leaping intpace, and they both rose to follow him as he sprang, lightly like oung man, holding his parcel, on to the rock.
14
"He must have reached it," said Lily Briscoe aloud, feeling suddenlompletely tired out. For the Lighthouse had become almost invisiblead melted away into a blue haze, and the effort of looking at it anhe effort of thinking of him landing there, which both seemed to bne and the same effort, had stretched her body and mind to the utmosth, but she was relieved. Whatever she had wanted to give him, when heft her that morning, she had given him at last.
"He has landed," she said aloud. "It is finished." Then, surging upuffing slightly, old Mr. Carmichael stood beside her, looking like ald pagan god, shaggy, with weeds in his hair and the trident (it wanly a French novel) in his hand. He stood by her on the edge of thawn, swaying a little in his bulk and said, shading his eyes with hiand: "They will have landed," and she felt that she had been righthey had not needed to speak. They had been thinking the same thingnd he had answered her without her asking him anything. He stoohere as if he were spreading his hands over all the weakness anuffering of mankind; she thought he was surveying, tolerantly anompassionately, their final destiny. Now he has crowned the occasionhe thought, when his hand slowly fell, as if she had seen him let falrom his great height a wreath of violets and asphodels whichluttering slowly, lay at length upon the earth.
Quickly, as if she were recalled by something over there, she turned ter canvas. There it was--her picture. Yes, with all its greens anlues, its lines running up and across, its attempt at something. Iould be hung in the attics, she thought; it would be destroyed. Buhat did that matter? she asked herself, taking up her brush againhe looked at the steps; they were empty; she looked at her canvas; ias blurred. With a sudden intensity, as if she saw it clear for econd, she drew a line there, in the centre. It was done; it wainished. Yes, she thought, laying down her brush in extreme fatigue have had my vision.